a b s t r a c t

Feelings of belonging are integral in people’s choice of what career to pursue. Women and men are dispropor-
tionately represented across careers, starting with academic training. The present research focuses on two fields

that are similar in their history and subject matter but feature inverse gender gaps—psychology (more women
than men) and philosophy (more men than women)—to investigate how theorized explanations for academic
gender gaps contribute to feelings of belonging. Specifically, we simultaneously model the relative contribution
of theoretically relevant individual differences (empathizing, systematizing, and intellectual combativeness) as
well as life goals (prioritization of family, money, and status) to feelings of belonging and majoring in psychology

or philosophy. We find that men report higher intellectual combativeness than women, and intellectual combat-
iveness predicts feelings of belonging and majoring in philosophy over psychology. Although systematizing and

empathizing are predictive of belonging and, in turn, majoring in psychology and philosophy, respectively, when
other factors are taken into account, women and men do not differ in empathizing and systematizing. Women,
more than men, report prioritizing having a family, wealth, and status in choosing a career, and these directly
or indirectly feed into feelings of belonging and majoring in psychology, in contrast to prior theory. Together,
these findings suggest that students’ perceptions of their own combativeness and the extent to which they desire
money and status play essential roles in women’s feeling they belong in psychology and men’s feeling they belong
in philosophy.
Women represent the majority of students in higher education,

but they are disproportionately represented across disciplines. Com-
pared to men, women are overrepresented in fields such as human-
ities and psychology and underrepresented in others such as STEM

(Science, Technology, Engineering, Math) and philosophy. These gen-
der disparities are problematic both because they limit the perspec-
tives, talents, and diverse skills brought to bear on the work and be-
cause these disparities emerge despite women and men’s equal capa-
bilities across various types of work. Not only can this inequity pre-
clude productivity and innovation (e.g., Deszsö and Ross, 2012), but

the lack of parity itself is unjust. To better understand the factors that
drive individuals towards or away from different fields, and control

for many of the typical confounds such as history and topic, we in-
vestigate the inverse gender gaps across two fields that are similar in

history (i.e., were once one field) and subject matter (e.g., human na-
ture, the mind, ethics, group interactions, knowledge, perceptions of

✩ Preregistration is available on the Open Science Framework.
∗ Corresponding author at: Heather Maranges, Department of Psychology, Winston-Salem, NC, 27109.
E-mail address: hmaranges@gmail.com (H.M. Maranges).

reality, morality): Psychology and Philosophy. This comparison is par-
ticularly illuminating because both pipelines leak early, with women

not enrolling in or leaving philosophy and men not enrolling in or
leaving psychology after introductory classes (e.g., Paxton et al., 2012;
Yu et al., 2020).
The extent to which people feel that they belong within a particular
field (i.e., the extent to which individuals feel accepted by and similar to
their group) has a strong influence on whether they pursue a particular
career path (e.g., Cheryan and Plaut, 2010; Good et al., 2012; Holland
and Gottfredson, 1976; Walton & Cohen, 2011). Yet, to date, little work
has investigated which factors contribute to belonging in psychology
versus philosophy (but see Thompson et al., 2016). This is an important

limitation, and the focus of the current work, because a better under-
standing of such factors has the potential to benefit academia broadly

by informing interventions that would increase diversity — the goal of
many universities, professional societies, and social organizations.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crbeha.2023.100097
Received 3 October 2022; Received in revised form 20 December 2022; Accepted 7 January 2023
2666-5182/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

H.M. Maranges, M. Iannuccilli, K. Nieswandt et al. Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 4 (2023) 100097
Humans are universally motivated to connect, form interpersonal
relationships, seek group membership, and attain social acceptance by
others (i.e., they need to belong; VandenBos, 2007/APA dictionary,
2021; Baumeister and Leary, 1995). These connections are facilitated

by perceptions that one is similar to others or has the traits and prior-
ities necessary to succeed in a group or context (e.g., in terms of de-
mographics, personality, interest, priorities, or ability). Evidence from

STEM fields suggests that satisfaction of the need to belong encourages

students to participate and persist in an academic field, whereas stu-
dents are discouraged from continuing when the need to belong is not

met (e.g., Cheryan and Plaut, 2010; Good et al., 2012; Walton & Co-
hen, 2011). For instance, compared to men, women, who make up the

minority of philosophy students, tend not to believe that people “like

me” could succeed in philosophy and perceive themselves as having lit-
tle in common with their philosophy instructors, tutors, or the “typical

philosophy major”, and are less likely to enroll in additional philoso-
phy courses (Thompson et al., 2016; for similar results, see Baron et al.,

2015).
Feelings of belonging emerge from perceiving fit between oneself
and the field (e.g., Morganson et al., 2010; Päßler and Hell, 2012;

Prediger, 1982), yet relatively little is known about the factors that de-
termine students’ sense of belonging. We draw from two related domains

of influences that have been theorized as explanations for gender gaps

in academic disciplines. The first domain of influences relates to individ-
ual differences, including students’ levels of empathizing, systematizing,

and intellectual combativeness. The second domain of influences relates
to life goals, including prioritization of having a family, having wealth,

and gaining social status. Specifically, we tested the extent to which indi-
vidual difference and life goal factors contribute to feelings of belonging

and, in turn, to major choice in the academic disciplines of psychology
and philosophy in the population where the gender gaps emerge (i.e.,

undergraduates) while modeling the two domains of factors simultane-
ously.

The inverse gender gaps

Women outnumber men in psychology. At North American universi-
ties, women constitute over 70% of psychology graduates at each level

of schooling — Bachelor’s (79%), Master’s (80%), and Doctorate (74%)
(averaged across 2017–18 and 18–19; National Center for Education
Statistics, 2019) — and 57% of faculty (Zippia Career Data, 2021). In
contrast, in philosophy, women are in the minority; constituting less

than 40% of philosophy students at each level—Bachelor’s (39%), Mas-
ter’s (35%), and Doctorate (33%) (American Academy of Arts and Sci-
ences Humanities Indicators, 2016; Paxton et al., 2012) — and 21%

of faculty (Zippia Career Data, 2021). These gaps first emerge at the
undergraduate level, both for initial enrolment and after introductory
classes (e.g., Paxton et al., 2012; Yu et al., 2020). We confirmed this
early gender gap with data from Concordia University in Canada, which

allowed for sampling from a more diverse population,1 across four aca-
demic years (2014/15 to 2017/18; see Supplemental Materials, hence-
forth SM, for detailed analyses and results): Women make up 81% of

psychology majors, whereas men make up only 19%. In contrast, men
make up 66% of philosophy majors, whereas women make up only 34%.
However, adding some nuance to when the training pipeline leaks, we
find the gap appears to widen most for philosophy after the first year

(i.e., average dropout of women of 32%; largely replicating past find-
ings) and after the second year for psychology (i.e., average dropout of

men of 12%). The inverse gender gaps of psychology and philosophy
are striking given that the two fields were once one, sharing historical
roots, and focused on similar topics. Determining what makes students
feel they belong is likely central to understanding why students enroll
and major in psychology versus philosophy.
1 Compared, e.g., to convenience samples (Gurven, 2018)

Theoretical accounts of the inverse gender gaps

One domain of explanations for the inverse gender gaps across aca-
demic fields relates to individual differences. Specifically, gender differ-
ences in the tendency towards empathizing (i.e., motivation and abil-
ity to identify and respond to others’ emotions) versus systematizing

(i.e., engaging with abstract ideas, logic, and interested in systems2)
(Baron-Cohen et al., 2003) and the combative nature of male-dominated

fields (e.g., Moulton, 1983; Beebee, 2013) have been explored. Accord-
ing to this individual difference perspective, women and men fit with

and choose fields stereotyped as feminine (e.g., psychology) or mascu-
line (e.g., philosophy) because on average, women score higher on em-
pathizing and men score higher on systematizing (e.g., Focquaert et al.,

2007; Greenberg et al., 2018). Although there is empirical support for
this argument (e.g., Focquaert et al., 2007; Greenberg et al., 2018; see
also Päßler and Hell, 2012; Zell et al., 2015), it has received criticism

for ignoring the differential socialization of women and men, concep-
tual issues surrounding the measure, and questions regarding the pre-
dictive power of the measures over other factors (e.g., Leslie et al., 2015;

Maranges et al., 2021). Moreover, the gender divide in constructs related

to empathizing vs. systematizing shrinks when the constructs are mea-
sured in more naturalistic contexts (e.g., Eisenberg and Lennon, 1983;

see Fine, 2010).
Importantly, whether there is a real-world difference between
women and men on these individual difference dimensions (and if so,
whether that difference is the result of nature or nurture) might be less
important than the question of whether people believe that there is a

difference. That is, even if women and men do not differ on empathiz-
ing and systematizing in a nonsexist society, there is no doubt that both

are useful measures insofar as they capture current perceptions, expec-
tations, and internalized stereotypes. For example, philosophy under-
graduates, including women, explicitly associate philosophy with some-
one who is “intelligent”, “intellectual”, “logical”, “curious”, and who is

“male” (Di Bella et al. 2016). Similarly, when students are instructed to
think about someone who is logical, they think of a man (Beebee, 2013).

In contrast, psychology is perceived as a field that does not require bril-
liance (Leslie et al., 2015) or systematizing (e.g., Amsel et al., 2014;

Pettijohn et al., 2015) and is associated with stereotypically feminine

traits (e.g., emotional, empathetic) and motivations (e.g., altruism, in-
timacy) (Boysen et al., 2021). Given the related associations between

these two individual differences, gender, and academic fields, we in-
clude empathizing and systematizing as candidate mediators in the link

between gender and feelings of belonging in psychology versus philos-
ophy.

Another individual difference that may influence feelings of belong-
ings relates to comfort with intellectual combativeness. Compared to

psychology, work in philosophy is solitary rather than collaborative,

and when scholars do come together to share their work, the dis-
course is typically argumentative and confrontational, which may be

construed as better fitting for men than women based on gender stereo-
types (Moulton, 1983; Beebee, 2013). Indeed, compared to men, women

predicted they would feel less comfortable participating in introduc-
tory philosophy class discussions than men (Baron et al., 2015; but see

Thompson et al., 2016). Hence, the extent to which gender influences

students’ views of themselves as intellectually combative may be asso-
ciated with feelings of belonging in philosophy, but not psychology.

A separate domain of explanations that vary with gender and may
influence feelings of belonging in diverse academic disciplines relates to

life goals. Traditionally aged undergraduates are identifying and navi-
gating life goals, including those related to career and family. Careers

may vary in the extent to which they facilitate (or are perceived to facil-
2 According to Baron-Cohen et al. (2003), systems “take inputs, which can

then be operated on in variable ways, to deliver different outputs in a rule-
governed way.”

2

H.M. Maranges, M. Iannuccilli, K. Nieswandt et al. Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 4 (2023) 100097

itate) the goals of having a family, financial security, and/or social sta-
tus. Moreover, people vary in the extent to which they prioritize those

factors. Accordingly, some scholars have suggested that people’s prior-
itization of family, wealth, and status can help us understand why stu-
dents choose to pursue one discipline over others (e.g., Kessels, 2005;

Montmarquette et al., 2002; Morgan et al., 2013).
When it comes to balancing a career with family, men and women
face considerably different challenges and social expectations. Though

men are increasingly invested in coparenting and often praised for want-
ing to balance a career with family life, women still shoulder the ma-
jority of the child-care responsibilities (Craig, 2006; Kotila et al., 2013).

Importantly, women are typically not praised for desiring work-life bal-
ance (Correll et al., 2007; see also Luhr, 2020) but rather are expected to

provide the lion’s share of childcare. As a result, women are more likely
to expect work-family conflict across a variety of careers (Coyle et al.,
2015). Although findings suggest that prioritization of a family does not
directly predict the gender gap, research in STEM demonstrates that the
perception that a field is less supportive of having a family may lower

one’s feelings of belongingness (Morgan et al., 2013). Because fields as-
sociated with women are perceived as allowing one to prioritize hav-
ing a family (e.g., Weisgram et al., 2011), psychology may be viewed

as being more family-friendly than philosophy. Moreover, many peo-
ple may associate a degree in philosophy with an academic career (and

academic careers are perceived as unfriendly to having a family; e.g.,
Tan-Wilson and Stamp, 2015), whereas a psychology degree is thought
to offer flexible career options (e.g., counselor, assessor). To this end,

we test whether psychology, compared to philosophy, is viewed as fa-
cilitating having a family.

Beyond whether one’s career is considered compatible with fam-
ily demands, students’ career choices may be influenced by the extent

to which a field is viewed as supportive of the goal of financial secu-
rity. Young people tend to be attracted to and choose majors that they

expect to provide them with wealth (e.g., National Longitudinal Sur-
vey of Youth data [1993] as assessed by Montmarquette et al., 2002),

and this is especially true for men (for meta-analysis see Konrad et al.,
2000; but see Montmarquette et al., 2002). There appears to be more

economic opportunity for psychology majors than for philosophy ma-
jors (Carnevale et al., 2015), and even when new opportunities arise

for philosophy majors, their perceptions lag behind (Weinberg, 2018).

Based on such findings, we could expect that students perceive psy-
chology versus philosophy as allowing one to prioritize money in one’s

career, and as a result, men would be more likely to choose psychol-
ogy over philosophy. Yet this prediction opposes the observed gender

gaps on average (i.e., that men are attracted to philosophy over psychol-
ogy). Perhaps men are more likely to view academia overall (including

both psychology and philosophy) as a viable, financially secure career

path, which would help explain the violation of such predictions. Al-
ternatively, it may be that men’s prioritization of wealth from a career

serves as a buffer against gendered perceptions for belonging in psychol-
ogy—men may experience stronger feelings of belonging in psychology

to the extent that it relates to money because they value money more
than women. Here, we test whether men prioritize money more than
women and whether such a priority serves to buffer men’s feelings of
belonging in psychology.

The last life goal we considered relates to having a prestigious rep-
utation or position relative to others in society, an affordance which

varies across fields and careers. Desire for social status is a univer-
sal human motivation (Anderson et al., 2015), and men are perceived

as more attractive to the extent that they demonstrate this motivation
(Buss, 1999; Buss et al., 2020; DeWall and Maner, 2008). Prioritization

of status is a primary factor that drives choices about careers for uni-
versity students (e.g., Haase and LautenschlaGer, 2011). In particular,

students appear driven to study in stereotype-consistent fields to acquire
status (e.g., Kessels, 2005). Thus, it may be that women who strongly

desire status feel a stronger sense of belonging in psychology (stereo-
typed as feminine) and men who strongly desire status feel a stronger

sense of belonging in philosophy (stereotyped as masculine), with major
choices aligning with these feelings of belonging. Likewise, we expect
that men will view philosophy, compared to psychology, as garnering
more social status compared to women, and vice versa.3

Summary of Hypotheses. That more women than men study psychol-
ogy and more men than women study philosophy is likely driven by

the extent to which students feel they belong in and are therefore more
inclined to major in a field. The current study assesses to what extent

competing explanatory factors contribute to feelings of belonging in psy-
chology and philosophy. Specifically, we aim to understand whether stu-
dents’ individual differences (i.e., empathizing, systematizing, and intel-
lectual combativeness) as well as life goals (i.e., prioritization of family,

money, and status) mediate the link between gender and belonging and,
in turn, choice to major in psychology or philosophy. We hypothesize

that women will view themselves as more empathizing, less systematiz-
ing and less combative, and will report greater prioritization of family

and weaker prioritization of money, compared to men. We expect that,
relative to women, men will perceive themselves as less empathizing,

more systematizing and more combative, and report weaker prioritiza-
tion of family and stronger prioritization of wealth. Moreover, we do not

expect a gender difference in prioritization of status; rather, we expect

that men who desire high status may feel more belonging in philoso-
phy, whereas women who desire high status may feel more belonging

in psychology. We also expect that higher perceptions of empathizing

and prioritization of family and wealth will predict majoring in psychol-
ogy over philosophy, and higher systematizing and combativeness will

predict majoring in philosophy over psychology.

It is important to keep in mind that these factors are unlikely to be in-
nate differences and are likely the result of both socialization and stereo-
types (e.g., Bian et al., 2017, 2018a,b; Hentschel et al., 2019; Kite et al.,

2008). Thus, the results of our model can inform practical interventions
aimed at closing the gender gaps.
Method
The present study was part of a preregistered empirical project on
the Open Science Foundation (OSF, https://osf.io/7yauq/?view_only=
875a58705ca74c2b95204dbaf1ec69ed).
Participants. Students enrolled in philosophy or psychology classes

in diverse (e.g., large state, small liberal arts, and ivy league) universi-
ties across the United States and Canada were invited to respond to an

online survey about career choices and their future.4 We excluded peo-
ple who began but did not complete the majority of the survey (n = 179),

failed the attention check (i.e., “I would say that I am paying attention,
as evidenced by my choosing the most negative option now”; n = 109),

asked to withdraw their data (n = 2), and/or were not philosophy or psy-
chology majors (n = 1415). Our final sample included 241 psychology

and philosophy majors (181 women, 62 men6; Mage = 21.63, SD = 5.19;
65.4% White, 16.9% Hispanic or Latino, 6.6% Chinese, 6.6% Black or
African, 4.6% Indian, 1.6% Native or Indigenous, 5.8% Indian, 1.6%

Iranian, 3.3% Other). See SM for more details on recruitment of partic-
ipants.

3 There is also work that suggests women’s participation in high-status fields
has increased over time and that psychology is not the highest status field (e.g.,
Lippa et al., 2014), such that women who are highly status-prioritizing may be
more likely to major in another field than psychology (or philosophy). 4 Data were collected in a single wave in Fall 2020 via “Survey_V4” (see OSF). 5 We retain these participants for one test of a preregistered hypothesis: That
women’s level of prioritization of status would predict major such that women

higher in prioritization of status elect to major in something other than psychol-
ogy of philosophy. 6 Without enough statistical power to analyze and make conclusions from data

of participants who identify as non-cis men and women, we did not analyze data

from people who identified as transgender men (n = 1), postgender (n = 2), non-
binary (n = 7), genderqueer (n = 1), genderfluid (n = 1), demifemale (n = 1).

3

H.M. Maranges, M. Iannuccilli, K. Nieswandt et al. Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 4 (2023) 100097
Procedure and materials. After participants provided consent, they

reported their major (Npsych = 167, Nphilo = 74) and demographic de-
tails. Participants then responded to measures of belonging in psychol-
ogy and philosophy, and reported on their own empathizing, system-
atizing, and combativeness, as well as the extent to which they prioritize

family, financial resources, and status in choosing a career. Participants
also reported on which of the two fields they believe better facilitates
prioritization of family, money, and status. Items were presented in a
random order. See SM for all additional items and details related to
scale development.
Feelings of belonging

Participants responded to 3 items that captured their feelings of be-
longing in psychology and 3 nearly identical items that captured their

feelings of belonging in philosophy, e.g., “I feel comfortable in the aca-
demic environment of psychology (philosophy)” on a 1 (strongly disagree)

to 7 (strongly agree) scale (psychology: M = 4.85, SD = 1.41; α = 0.83;
philosophy: M = 3.64, SD = 1.73; α = 0.89). We adapted these items
from Walton & Cohen (2007). For all items, see SM.
Individual difference factors
Empathizing. Participants responded to 7 items that measured to what

extent they are motivated to identify and respond to other people’s emo-
tions (Baron-Cohen et al., 2003), such as “I can tune into how someone

feels” on a scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree) (M = 5.07,
SD = 0.83; α = 0.71).
Systematizing. Participants responded to 9 items that measured to
what extent they are motivated to analyze or construct systems (i.e.,
that which takes and operates on inputs to deliver outputs according to
some particular rules; Baron-Cohen et al., 2003), such as “I like to think
about abstract ideas” on a scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly
agree) (M = 4.53, SD = 0.89; α = 0.77).

Intellectual combativeness. Participants responded to 7 items that cap-
tured the extent to which they enjoy and engage in intellectual de-
bates/confrontation at the cost of social comfort on a scale from 1

(strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). For example, items include “In

defending my ideas, I can sometimes frustrate other people” and “If a de-
bate or a theoretical discussion gets heated, I feel uncomfortable” (reversed)

(M = 4.71, SD = 1.11; α = 0.81).
Life goal factors

Prioritization of family. Participants responded to 4 items that cap-
tured the extent to which they personally desire a career that facilitates

having and time with a family, using a 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly
agree) scale: e.g., “I prefer a job that would allow for flexible work hours
for family and children” (M = 4.72, SD = 1.65; α = 0.88).

Prioritization of money. Participants responded to 3 items that re-
flected their personal desire for wealth on a 1 (strongly disagree) to 7

(strongly agree) scale, e.g., “I want to make a lot of money in my career”
(M = 4.87, SD = 1.46; α = 0.87).

Prioritization of status. Participants responded to 3 items that mea-
sured the extent to which they desire status and prestige via their ca-
reer using a 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree) scale, e.g., “I want a

career that gets respect and admiration” (M = 4.75, SD = 1.24; α = 0.78).
Perceptions of the fields

Prioritization of family. Participants responded to 5 items that cap-
tured the extent to which they believe a field facilitates having a

family, by choosing between Psychology and Philosophy: e.g., “A ca-
reer in ______ facilitates the work-life balance essential for having a fam-
ily.” We calculated perceptions of fit between prioritization of family

and psychology (as compared to philosophy) by dividing the number

of times psychology was chosen over philosophy by the total number

of items (i.e., 5) and vice versa to calculate perceptions of philoso-
phy (as compared to psychology), such that these values are inversely

related.

Prioritization of money. Participants responded to 3 items that cap-
tured the extent to which they believe a field facilitates making money,

by choosing between Psychology and Philosophy: e.g., “_____ is well-
suited to those who want to make a lot of money in their career.” Per-
ceptions of fit between prioritization of money and psychology (as

compared to philosophy) was calculated by dividing the number of
times psychology was chosen over philosophy by the total number

of items (i.e., 3) and vice versa to calculate perceptions of philoso-
phy (as compared to psychology), such that these values are inversely

related.

Prioritization of status. Participants responded to 5 items that cap-
tured the extent to which they believe a field facilitates gaining so-
cial status, by choosing between Psychology and Philosophy: e.g., “Work-
ing in ______ would allow a person to build a name and reputation for

him/herself.” We calculated perceptions that status can be gained in
psychology (as compared to philosophy) by dividing the number of
times psychology was chosen over philosophy by the total number

of items (i.e., 5) and vice versa to calculate perceptions of philoso-
phy (as compared to psychology), such that these values are inversely

related.
Results and discussion
To assess the relations between gender, field of study, feelings of

belonging, and factors related to individual differences (i.e., empathiz-
ing, sympathizing, and combativeness) as well as life goals (i.e., priori-
tization of family, wealth, and status) we examined the bivariate, zero-
order associations between our variables (Table 1). We then examined

participants’ views as to how psychology versus philosophy facilitate

said goals (paired t-tests), how such factors predict feelings of belong-
ing and majoring in psychology versus philosophy, and how these rela-
tions vary by gender (i.e., interaction effects, see SM). We test whether

gender and the different factors predict feelings of belonging and major
choice using a series of regressions (i.e., linear regression for feelings
of belonging as outcome and binomial logistic regression for major as
outcome).
Finally, a structural equation model (SEM, namely, a path analysis)
was used to simultaneously assess how individual difference and life
goal factors contribute to the gender gaps in psychology and philosophy
(i.e., partially explain variance in the link between gender and belonging
in philosophy and psychology, which in turn predict major). We employ

SEM instead of basic mediation because SEM allows for complex se-
quential mediation and moderation and simultaneous assessment of the

associations among gender, individual difference factors (i.e., empathiz-
ing, systematizing, combativeness), life goal factors (i.e., prioritization

of family, prioritization of money and status), and feelings of belonging
in psychology and philosophy as well as their relative contributions to
major (see Fig. 1).
Gender and field of study
There was a positive correlation between majoring in psychology
vs. philosophy and identifying as a woman vs. man (see Table 1), such

that women were more likely to major in psychology and men in phi-
losophy. Of psychology majors, 83% were women. However, perhaps

because women were overall more willing to respond to our survey,

we collected more data from women (56%) than men (44%) in philos-
ophy. Nonetheless, our pilot study of aggregated enrollment data from

2014/15, 2015/16, 2016/17, and 2017/1 at our institution replicates
this pattern: More women than men enroll in classes in psychology when
beginning university, and more men than women enroll in philosophy
classes when beginning university (see Figs. 1S – 4S).
4

H.M. Maranges, M. Iannuccilli, K. Nieswandt et al. Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 4 (2023) 100097
Table 1
Correlations among primary variables.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

1. Major (0=philosophy, 1=psychology) –
2. Gender (0=man, 1=woman) .29∗∗∗ –
3. Belonging in Psychology .72∗∗∗ .26∗∗∗ –
4. Belonging in Philosophy −0.65∗∗∗ −0.25∗∗∗ −0.46∗∗∗ –
5. Empathizing .26∗∗∗ .17∗∗ .35∗∗∗ −0.10 –
6. Systematizing −0.43∗∗∗ −0.26∗∗∗ −0.38∗∗∗ .55∗∗∗ −0.95∗∗∗ –
7. Intellectual Combativeness −0.33∗∗∗ −0.19∗∗ −0.11† .33∗∗∗ −0.01 −0.26∗∗∗ –
8. Prioritization of Family .11† −0.04 .20∗∗ −0.14∗ .22∗∗∗ −0.26∗∗∗ .01 –
9. Prioritization of Money .36∗∗∗ .13∗ .35∗∗∗ −0.35∗∗∗ .08 −0.21∗∗∗ .08 .27∗∗∗ –
10. Prioritization of Status .01 −0.02 .08 .02 .02 .07 −0.21∗∗∗ .01 .47∗∗∗
Note: †p < .10, ∗p < .05, ∗∗p < .01, ∗∗∗p < .001.

Fig. 1. Belonging in Psychology and Philosophy Path Model. Note: Contributors to feelings of belonging in psychology are represented in italics, and contributors
to feelings of belonging in philosophy are represented in bold. ∗p < .05, ∗∗p < .01, ∗∗∗p < .001.
Feelings of belonging
Feelings of belonging in psychology were negatively associated with
feelings of belonging in philosophy (see Table 1), suggesting that the
more students feel they belong in psychology, the less they feel they

belong in philosophy and vice versa. Gender was also positively asso-
ciated with belonging in psychology and negatively with belonging in

philosophy: women, compared to men, report feeling more belonging in

psychology and men, compared to women, report feeling more belong-
ing in philosophy.

Gender and individual difference factors

For each individual difference factor, we first describe significant bi-
variate associations with gender and belonging in psychology and phi-
losophy (see Table 1 for correlations) and then describe interaction anal-
yses (i.e., between gender and individual differences in predicting be-
longing and majoring; see SM).

Empathizing. Women, compared to men, perceived themselves as

more empathizing, per the positive association between gender and em-
pathizing (see Table 1 for correlations and Table 2 for means and stan-
dard deviations). Moreover, empathizing was positively associated with

belonging and majoring in psychology (Table 1), such that the more
empathizing people perceive themselves to be, the more they feel they
belong in psychology and the more likely they are to major in that field.
Table 2
Means and Standard Deviations for Individual Difference factors.

Major

Individual differences Philosophy Psychology
Empathizing 4.76 [1.01]a 5.21 [0.70]
Men 4.50 [0.95] 5.20 [0.56]
Women 4.96 [1.03] 5.21 [0.73]
Systematizing 5.10 [0.67] 4.28 [0.86]
Men 5.30 [0.60] 4.50 [0.56]
Women 4.94 [0.69] 4.23 [0.90]
Combativeness 5.24 [1.02] 4.47 [1.07]
Men 5.13 [0.90] 4.98 [1.13]
women 5.33 [1.11] 4.37 [1.03]
Note. aMean [SD]. Responses were on a 7-point scale (1 = “strongly disagree”
to 7 = “strongly agree”).
Empathizing and gender interacted to predict feelings of belonging

in philosophy but did not interact to predict feelings of belonging in psy-
chology (see analysesin SM,starting on page 10). At low, not high, levels

of empathizing, there is an effect of gender on feelings of belonging in
philosophy. For people who report higher empathizing tendencies, men

and women are no different in how much they feel they belong in phi-
losophy; but for people low in empathizing, men feel like they belong in

philosophy more than women, who feel they belong in psychology. Ex-
amining the interaction between gender and empathizing another way,

within gender, we see that among men, there is an effect of empathiz-
5

H.M. Maranges, M. Iannuccilli, K. Nieswandt et al. Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 4 (2023) 100097
ing, such that men who reported higher self-perceptions of empathizing
felt less belonging in philosophy compared to men who reported lower
empathizing, whereas there was no difference among women. In other
words, perceptions of empathizing predicted feelings of belonging in
philosophy for men, but not women. Finally, gender and empathizing

did not interact to predict in majoring in either psychology or philoso-
phy.

Systematizing. Men, compared to women, perceived themselves as

more systematizing (see positive correlation between gender and sys-
tematizing in Tables 1 and 2 for means and standard deviations). Sys-
tematizing was associated negatively with feelings of belonging in psy-
chology, positively with feelings of belonging in philosophy, and nega-
tively with majoring in psychology over philosophy (or positively with

majoring in philosophy over psychology; Table 1).
Systematizing and gender interacted to predict feelings of belonging

in psychology, but not feelings of belonging in philosophy (see SM start-
ing on page 14). At high, but not low, levels of systematizing, gender

predicts feelings of belonging in psychology. That is, for people low in

systematizing, men and women do not differ in their feelings of belong-
ing in psychology; but, for people who are high in systematizing, men

feel less belonging and women feel more belonging in psychology. For
both women and men, there is an effect of systematizing, such that the
more systematizing a student perceives themselves to be, the less they
feel they belong in psychology, but this effect appears larger for men.
Combativeness. Men self-reported more intellectual combativeness

than did women (per negative correlation between gender and combat-
iveness, Tables 1; see 2 for means and standard deviations). Moreover,

combativeness was positively associated with feelings of belonging and
majoring in philosophy (Table 1).

Combativeness interacted with gender to predict feelings of belong-
ing and majoring in philosophy, but not psychology (see SM starting

on page 17). At low, not high levels, of combativeness gender predicts
feelings of belonging and majoring in philosophy. That is, for people
who perceive themselves as being low in combativeness, men feel more
belonging and are more likely to major in philosophy, compared to
women. However, this gender difference disappears for people high in
combativeness, such that women high in combativeness are just as likely

to feel like they belong or go into philosophy as men high in combat-
iveness. Probed another way, women who perceive themselves as more

combative are more likely to feel they belong and major in philosophy,
but combativeness is not predictive for men.

In sum, compared to men, women view themselves as more em-
pathizing and less systematizing and combative. Higher empathizing

and lower combativeness and systematizing were associated with ma-
joring in psychology over philosophy; inversely, lower empathizing and

higher combativeness and systematizing were associated with major-
ing in philosophy over psychology. Students felt stronger feelings of

belonging in psychology when they perceived themselves to be more
empathizing and less systematizing (and to a nonsignificant extent, less
combative), while feelings of belonging in philosophy were associated
with higher systematizing and combativeness.
Gender and factors related to life goals
Prioritization of Family. As predicted, psychology (M = 0.65,

SD = 0.36) was seen as facilitating having a family more than was philos-
ophy (M = 0.34, SD = 0.35), t(240) = −6.88, p < .001. Men and women

did not differ in the extent to which they prioritize family in choos-
ing a career, as evidenced by no significant association between gender

and prioritization of family (see Table 1 for correlations and Table 3 for

means and standard deviations). Prioritization of family predicted feel-
ings of belonging in psychology positively but in philosophy negatively;

however, prioritization of family was not significantly directly associ-
ated with majoring in psychology over philosophy (i.e., this association

was marginal; Table 1).

Table 3
Means and Standard Deviations for Life Goals factors.
Major

Life Goals Philosophy Psychology
Prioritization of Family 4.47 [1.68]a 4.84 [1.64]
men 4.34 [1.52] 5.38 [1.00]
women 4.57 [1.80] 4.72 [1.73]
Prioritization of Money 4.08 [1.71] 5.20 [1.20]
men 3.70 [1.53] 5.46 [1.07]
women 4.37 [1.80] 5.15 [1.22]
Prioritization of Status 4.69 [1.43] 4.75 [1.14]
men 4.41 [1.28] 5.19 [0.93]
women 4.92 [1.51] 4.67 [1.17]
Note. aMean [SD]. Responses were on a 7-point scale (1 = “strongly disagree”
to 7 = “strongly agree”).

Moreover, prioritization of family interacted with gender to predict
belonging in psychology, but not philosophy (see SM starting on page
22). At low, but not high, levels of prioritization of family, there is an
effect of gender. For people who highly value having a family, men and
women do not differ in their feelings of belonging in psychology; the

more people prioritized family, the more they felt they belonged in psy-
chology. For people who prioritize family in their career choice to a

comparatively low extent, women are more likely than men to feel they
belong in psychology.
Similarly, prioritization of family interacted with gender to predict
major. At low, but not high, levels of prioritizing a family in career
choice, women are more likely than men to major in psychology over
philosophy and vice versa. No such difference was found among people

who highly value having a family. Probing this another way, prioritiza-
tion of family predicts major for men but not women; men who strongly

prioritize being able to have a family in a career are more likely to major
in psychology over philosophy compared to men who do not prioritize
having a family in a career.
Prioritization of Money. As predicted, psychology (M = 0.89,
SD = 0.27) was seen as the career that provides financial resources,
rather than philosophy (M = 0.11, SD = 0.27), t(238) = −22.42, p < .001.
Unexpectedly, women, more than men, prioritized gaining wealth from
a career, and that prioritization of money was associated with feelings
of belonging and majoring in psychology (see Table 1 for correlations
and Table 3 for means and standard deviations).
In moderation analyses (see SM starting on page 27), prioritization
of money interacted with gender to predict belonging in psychology
but did not predict belonging in philosophy. Specifically, at low, but
not high, levels of prioritization of money in one’s career, women more
than men feel they belong in psychology. There is no gender difference

in feelings of belonging in psychology among people who highly pri-
oritize making a lot of money from their career. That is, for both men

and women, prioritizing making a lot of money in their career predicts
belonging in psychology, but this effect is stronger for men according to
analyses probing the interaction by gender.
Prioritization of money and gender also interacted to predict major
in a similar pattern: for people who highly prioritize gaining wealth from
their career, there is no gender difference in choice of major. However,
for people who prioritize making money from their career to a lower
degree, women are more likely than men to major in psychology over
philosophy. Probing the interaction another way (i.e., by gender), the
more students prioritize making a lot of money in a career, the more
likely they are to major in psychology over philosophy, but this effect
is stronger for men than women.
Prioritization of Status. In contrast to predictions, overall, psychology
(M = 0.62, SD = 0.27) was seen as providing more social status than
philosophy (M = 0.37, SD = 0.27), t(240) = −7.33, p < .001. Both men
(t(59) = −4.31, p < .001) and women (t(179) = −6.21, p < .001) evinced
6

H.M. Maranges, M. Iannuccilli, K. Nieswandt et al. Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 4 (2023) 100097
the same differential perceptions of the fields.7 Men and women did
not differ with respect to prioritizing status from their career, nor did
prioritization of status predict feelings of belonging or majoring in either
field (see Table 1 for correlations and Table 3 for means and standard
deviations).
Prioritization of status and gender interacted to predict belonging

and majoring in psychology over philosophy, but they did not inter-
act to predict feelings of belonging in philosophy (see SM starting on

page 32). At low, but not high, levels of prioritizing status in choos-
ing a career, there is an effect of gender, with lower status seeking

women having stronger feelings of belonging in psychology compared

to lower status seeking men. In contrast, for people who highly prior-
itize gaining status via their careers, there is no gender difference in

belonging in psychology. Probing this another way, for men but not
women, there is an effect of prioritizing status from a career, such that

the more they desire status, the more men feel they belong in psychol-
ogy. Prioritization of status and gender interacted to predict majoring

in psychology over philosophy in a similar way: at low levels of pri-
oritization of status, women are more likely to major in psychology

than men, but there is no effect of gender for higher status seekers.

Though, probing the interaction another way, status is more predic-
tive of major for men than for women, with higher prioritization of sta-
tus predicting majoring in psychology over philosophy for men but not

women.
In sum, across all life goals by gender (i.e., prioritization of family,
money, and status) interaction analyses, a similar pattern emerges—at
high levels, men and women do not differ in belonging or major, but

at low levels, they do. This pattern suggests that when people’s prioriti-
zation of family or money or status is relatively low, and therefore not

guiding their belonging and major, they seem to feel a stronger sense of
belonging and are more likely to major in stereotype-consistent majors,
with women favoring psychology and men favoring philosophy.
Structural equation model (SEM)
Method and Model. We built an SEM in order to assess whether

and how the relevant individual difference and life goal factors medi-
ate or moderate the association between gender and belonging and, in

turn, majoring in psychology or philosophy when simultaneously mod-
elled. The model contained all significant bivariate associations (see

Table 1) and significant interactions (see moderation analyses, SM) be-
tween gender and the six explanatory factors. Based on theory, we

modelled individual differences (i.e., empathizing, systematizing, and
intellectual combativeness) as preceding life goals (i.e., prioritization
of family, money, and status) in contributing to feelings of belonging

and subsequently major. We then removed all non-significant interac-
tions (i.e., Empathizing X Gender → Belonging in Philosophy, Combat-
iveness X Gender → Belonging in Psychology, Prioritization of Family

X Gender → Belonging in Psychology) and re-calculated pathway es-
timates. We then removed nonsignificant pathways from the stream-
lined model (i.e., Gender → Major, Gender → Empathizing, Combat-
iveness → Belonging in Psychology, Prioritization of Family → Belong-
ing in Psychology, Prioritization of Family → Belonging in Philoso-
phy; see SM, page 37), which yielded our final model, displayed in

Fig. 1.
All variables were measured (i.e., none were latent factors); our

analyses can hence be described as a path analysis. The path analy-
sis was computed using AMOS (Arbuckle, 2014) and a Markov chain

Monte Carlo (MCMC) Bayesian technique because the model included
dichotomous variables (i.e., gender, major) which disallows normally

7 These patterns of results for perceptions of the fields replicated when includ-
ing non-psychology and -philosophy majors to ensure our results were not an

artifact of having more psychology student participants: prioritization of family,
t(384) = −9.52, p < .001; prioritization of money, t(382) = −25.30, p < .001;
prioritization of status, t(384) = −8.07, p < .001.

distributed outcome variables (see Choi and Levy, 2017). MCMC is a
simulation-based estimation method; it empirically samples from the
current data. Monte Carlo methods build on random simulation, and
Markov chain methods build on samples that are independent from each

other. Our MCMC model was specified in the following way. Burn-in ob-
servations were set to 500, the random walk tuning parameter to 0.7, the

number of batches for bath means to 20, and the convergence criterion
to 1.00.
Interpreting Model. See Fig. 1. We interpret the model from left to

right (and top to bottom within columns of mediators), i.e., from gen-
der to major. Importantly, the direct association between gender and

major was no longer significant when taking individual differences (i.e.,

empathizing, systematizing, and combativeness) and life goals (i.e., pri-
oritization of family, money, and status) into account. Such factors ac-
count for significant variance in the relationship between gender and

major and help explain gendered feelings of belonging and subsequent
gender gaps in psychology and philosophy.
When all factors were taken into account, gender was no longer

uniquely associated with empathizing and systematizing. Still, em-
pathizing plays an important role: the more people report being em-
pathizing, the more they prioritize family and the more they feel they

belong in psychology, which predicts majoring in psychology over phi-
losophy. Empathizing and systematizing were inversely related, such

that the more empathizing people were, the less systematizing they
were.
Systematizing contributed negatively to prioritization of family and

of money, and therefore indirectly to lower feelings of belonging in psy-
chology. Systematizing also directly negatively predicted feelings of be-
longing in psychology and positively predicted feelings of belonging in

philosophy, which were in turn associated with higher likelihood of ma-
joring in philosophy over psychology. These were the two strongest ef-
fects in our model. Put another way, people who perceive themselves

as highly systematizing do not highly value having a family or mak-
ing a lot of money in a career and strongly feel that they belong in

philosophy but not in psychology; consequently, they tend to major in
philosophy, not psychology. Although gender did not directly predict
systematizing such that men or women were more systematizing (when

taking all other factors into account), gender interacted with systematiz-
ing to predict belonging in psychology. Specifically, men who are high

in systematizing feel especially low belonging in psychology compared
to women who are equally high in systematizing. This suggests that for
women high in systematizing, aspects of the culture of psychology are
still welcoming to them, but less so for men. Systematizing is moderately
related to intellectual combativeness.
Intellectual combativeness differs by gender, such that men appear
more combative than women, and positively predicts the prioritization
of status from one’s career as well as higher feelings of belonging in
philosophy. Although higher prioritization of status is associated with
stronger feelings of belonging in psychology and subsequently majoring
in psychology, the higher feelings of belonging in philosophy associated
with high combativeness predicts majoring in philosophy.

Prioritization of family in choosing a career is related to more em-
pathizing, less systematizing, and more prioritization of money, but it

is not predicted or moderated by gender and does not predict feelings
of belonging. This is to say, men and women do not differ in the extent

to which they want to have a family, and the desire to have a family-
friendly career does not directly feed into feelings of belonging in one

field over the other. Instead, our model suggests that the desire to have
a family contributes to the desire to make a lot of money in one’s career,

which in turn contributes to feelings of belonging in and therefore ma-
joring in psychology over philosophy. Prioritization of money also inter-
acted with gender to predict belonging in psychology. Namely, whereas

women and men who highly prioritize money feel equal belonging in

psychology, women who deprioritize money feel they belong in psy-
chology more than do men who deprioritize money from their careers.

Without a desire to have wealth, which is more easily accomplished via
7

H.M. Maranges, M. Iannuccilli, K. Nieswandt et al. Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 4 (2023) 100097
psychology than philosophy, men do not experience the same strong
feelings of belonging that women experience, again suggesting that the
culture of psychology may be friendlier to women.
Prioritization of money was also associated with prioritization of
status, which positively predicted feelings of belonging in psychology,

which predict majoring in psychology over philosophy. Notably, priori-
tization of status interacted with gender also. As with the prioritization

of money, women are more likely than men to feel they belong in psy-
chology when they do not value garnering status via their career. But

also, probing this another way, for men but not women, the more they
desire status, the more men feel they belong in psychology. High feelings
of belonging in psychology, in turn, predict majoring in that subject
Feelings of belonging in psychology and feelings of belonging
in philosophy were inversely related, such that being high in one

tended to predict low levels of the other. And, of course, feel-
ings of belonging in psychology predicted majoring in that field,

and feelings of belonging in philosophy predicted majoring in that
field.

Summary of findings. Our model highlights individual difference fac-
tors and life goals that account for feelings of belonging in academic

psychology and philosophy, in turn influencing the likelihood of ma-
joring in either field. Students are likely to feel they belong and major

in psychology to the extent that they perceive themselves as highly em-
pathizing, less systematizing, and highly prioritizing family, money, and

status in their career. These students tend to be women. Students tend

to feel they belong and major in philosophy to the extent that they per-
ceive themselves as highly systematizing and intellectually combative.

These students tend to be men. Adding some nuance, the interaction
effects appear to reflect what we might think of as buffers against the
gendered culture of psychology for men: men who were highly oriented
toward systematizing, relatively unconcerned about making money in
their careers, or did not value gaining status via their careers felt that
they do not belong in psychology to the same extent that women with
comparable traits and priorities did.
General discussion
Women and men are disproportionately represented across academic
fields. Psychology and philosophy share history and topical interests yet
feature inverse gender gaps: more women than men study psychology

and more men than women study philosophy. Data from our own in-
stitution confirm that pattern and further finds that the pipelines leak

early, in introductory undergraduate courses. It is important to under-
stand contributors to the feelings of belonging in these fields, which

are likely a proximate and powerful driver of people’s decisions about
what to study given the importance of (perceived) fit between person
and field (e.g., Cheryan and Plaut, 2010; Good et al., 2012; Holland
and Gottfredson, 1976; Morganson et al., 2010; Päßler and Hell, 2012;

Prediger, 1982; Walton & Cohen, 2011). The present research exam-
ined factors that likely play a role in the maintaining the gender dis-
parities across psychology vs. philosophy—i.e., hypotheses that women

are more empathizing and prioritizing of family; and that men are more
systematizing, intellectually combative, and prioritizing of money and

status—and, importantly, how these factors contribute to feelings of be-
longing.

We examined whether and how gender predicts major through per-
ceptions of one’s individual difference traits (empathizing, systematiz-
ing, and combativeness), life goals (prioritization of family, money, and

status), and in turn feelings of belonging in psychology and philosophy
in undergraduate students across North America. Critically, when these

factors are considered, gender no longer directly predicts major, suggest-
ing that individual differences and life goals that vary with gender may

be the proximal cause of the gender gap in psychology and philosophy.

Individual differences and life goal profiles for psychology and
philosophy
In choosing what career to pursue, people compare their personal
characteristics to those that appear to dominate the field to assess fit.
Past work casts people’s perceptions of psychology as an empathetic,
communal field (e.g., Holland and Gottfedson, 1976), and, as we find
in the present work, supportive of having a family, wealth, and social
status. Philosophy, in contrast, is seen as the intellectually combative

field, and, as our results suggest, unhelpful in pursuing the goals of fam-
ily, wealth, and social status. We empirically examine the individual

difference and life goal profiles of students who feel they belong in and
therefore major in psychology versus philosophy.
The picture is complex. Although perceptions of their own levels
of empathizing, systematizing, and intellectual combativeness played
important roles in feelings of belonging and major, they were not

merely gendered differences as past work might suggest (e.g., Baron-
Cohen et al., 2003). When evaluated in light of other factors, like com-
bativeness and life goals, men and women did not differ in empathizing

and systematizing.

Still, empathizing and systematizing play important, though not sim-
ply gendered, roles in explaining the gender gap. People who view

themselves as high in empathizing feel they fit in psychology, consis-
tent with theory, and also more strongly desire a career that facili-
tates having a family. Prioritization of family in a career is likewise

not gendered. This takes concerns about family-work balance off the

table as a direct explanation of the gender gaps in psychology and phi-
losophy; instead, prioritization of family might motivate prioritization

of money, which more directly contributes to feelings of belonging in
psychology.
Systematizing does a lot of work in explaining students’ feelings of

belonging and majoring in psychology vs. philosophy (i.e., it is statisti-
cally associated with many of the contributing factors, and these associ-
ations are of relatively large magnitude). Students who perceive them-
selves as highly systematizing feel particularly low belonging in psy-
chology and particularly high belonging in philosophy. Perceiving one-
self as highly systematizing does have different implications for men and

women’s feelings of fit, though: Compared to highly systemizing women,
highly systemizing men felt alienated (i.e., lower feelings of belonging)
in psychology. That is, it is not that men tend to be more systematizing
than women (when other factors are considered), rather women who
are highly systematizing may feel buffered against the incompatibility

between their nature and that of psychology (i.e., perceived as empathiz-
ing) compared to men who are highly systematizing. It is unclear what

that buffer is; it could be gender on its own, providing the feeling psy-
chology is for people “like them” given women feel more comfortable

in environments where women are represented (e.g., Dasgupta et al.,
2015).
Crucially, we saw gender differences in intellectual combativeness,
with men, more than women, perceiving themselves as highly motivated
and willing to engage in intellectual debate, even at the cost of social

coherence and comfort. Combativeness predicted strong feelings of be-
longing, and in turn, majoring in philosophy. An important theoretical

insight arises when considering that intellectual combativeness is associ-
ated with high levels of systematizing, which is related to more belong-
ing in philosophy and inversely related to empathizing, which predicts

belonging in psychology. If combativeness both (a) drives the gender

divide in psychology vs. philosophy and (b) covaries with high system-
atizing / low empathizing which drive the gender divide in philosophy

vs. psychology, then without operationalizing combativeness, we might
find that systematizing and empathizing are partially responsible for the

gender gaps, which prior work might suggest, by virtue of limited mea-
surement. Put another way, intellectual combativeness appears to be an

integral piece to the puzzle in understanding why men are attracted to
and women are deterred from philosophy compared to psychology.
8

H.M. Maranges, M. Iannuccilli, K. Nieswandt et al. Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 4 (2023) 100097
Our model is also consistent with the possibility that people who
perceive themselves as more combative and therefore systematizing feel

less belonging in psychology because they also prioritize having a fam-
ily and money, which fosters feelings of fit with psychology. Notably,

prioritization of money and status contribute to feelings of belonging
in psychology, but are unrelated to feelings of belonging in philosophy,

both of which contribute to major choice. This pattern suggests that peo-
ple who desire a career that provides them with wealth and status feel

more at home in psychology, but such concerns may not be weighed in
considering philosophy as an academic home and major. It may be that
philosophy does not attract people who desire wealth and social status,
and that may be inherent to the sort of work philosophers do, which
we have argued entails abstract work and building knowledge for its

own sake (Maranges et al., 2021). However, we also found that intel-
lectual combativeness fed into prioritization of status, which suggests

that those who feel they belong in philosophy also desire to be known

for their work. Perhaps this is a different sort of status than what psy-
chology is perceived to provide. All in all, our findings suggest that the

picture is complex, but they also add clarity.
Implications for interventions

Our findings can inform interventions aimed at closing the gen-
der gaps by increasing women’s feelings of belonging in philosophy

and men’s feelings of belonging in psychology. Intellectual combative-
ness is one of the most powerful predictors of feelings of belonging in

our model, both directly and through associations with systematizing

and empathizing. Accordingly, it will be essential to target (a) expecta-
tions that men should be, but women should not be intellectually com-
bative and (b) the combative style of intellectual debate in academic

philosophy. Successful interventions on women’s beliefs that they can-
not grow their intelligence and are not brilliant (e.g., Blackwell et al.,

2007)—which may be perceived a requisite to engagement in intellec-
tual combativeness, as its link with systematizing could suggest—can be

adapted to also address stereotypes about combativeness. For example,

women may benefit from learning that just as many women lawyers en-
gage in intense styles of debate as men (e.g., Burton et al., 1991) or about

successful debaters who are women, as role models in particular con-
texts help women feel they belong in those contexts (e.g., Young et al.,

2013). Addressing this at its core, though, entails that the stereotype

that combativeness indicates intellectual prowess should itself be bro-
ken, especially for men. Additionally, philosophy departments, organi-
zations, and conferences, should encourage a respectful discussion and

discourage confrontational debate styles. This can begin in undergradu-
ate classrooms, with instructors explicitly discussing this issue. But also,

this culture change should be at the level of faculty and graduate stu-
dents, who interact with more junior philosophy students.

Recall that people who highly prioritized money (who tended to be
women) and status felt more belonging in psychology, whereas those
priorities were unrelated to philosophy. Hence, attracting more diverse
students into philosophy may be accomplished by highlighting how
philosophers often also engage in and inform discussions, such as about
political or social issues, in the public spotlight. Moreover, our results

suggest that the prioritization of money may in part emerge from peo-
ple’s desire to have a family, which can be expensive. Accordingly, mak-
ing philosophy a more family-friendly environment, such as by allowing

flexible hours, work from home, and funding of child-care, may trickle
down to undergraduates’ perceptions.

Finally, the gender imbalances themselves likely self-perpetuate: Stu-
dents feel less belonging in an academic group where they are in the

gender minority (e.g., Inzlicht and Ben-Zeev, 2003; Sekaquaptewa and

Thompson, 2002). Although broader interventions are necessary to in-
crease the number of women in philosophy, for example, pairing the

women who are already studying philosophy to work together may
buffer their feelings of belonging. Indeed, research in STEM finds that
when they work in groups with other women (vs. men; Dasgupta et al.,

2015) or receive tutoring from or with other women (vs. men; for re-
view, see Robinson et al., 2005), women experience heightened feelings

of belonging and are more likely to persevere. Men may also benefit
from working with other men in psychology.
Limitations and future directions

Notwithstanding its strength in terms of relevant sample and out-
come, preregistration, and simultaneous modeling of important factors,

this work is limited in a few ways worth mentioning. First, although
35% of our sample is non-White, we did not have enough participants

of color to examine other problematic gaps, lack of diversity, or is-
sues of intersectionality. For example, Black students are underrepre-
sented in philosophy (i.e., Black PhD students and graduates combined

make up 1.32% of philosophers, but 13.4% of the population in the
United States; Botts et al., 2014; US Census, 2021), with a pipeline that
also leaks during undergraduate training (Bright et al., forthcoming;
Schwitzgebel et al., 2021a). It is likely that gender identity interacts
with ethnicity / race in creating unique, aggregating challenges to one’s

feelings of belonging in psychology and philosophy (i.e., intersectional-
ity; Crenshaw, 2018/1989). We also did not collect detailed data that

allowed us to test our hypotheses for students from other underrepre-
sented groups, including LGBQ+, working class and low socioeconomic

status, and people with disabilities. Moreover, in building on past work
and being able to make sufficiently powered, generalizable conclusions
about people who report their gender as man or woman only, we were

unable to systematically examine the perceptions and priorities of non-
binary gendered students in psychology and philosophy. Future work

should aim for more inclusivity in research on gender gaps.
Second, and relatedly, our sample was limited in diversity insofar
as student participants attend universities in WEIRD places (i.e., United

States and Canada), where the hegemonic culture is WEIRD (i.e., West-
ern, Educated, Industrial, Rich, Democratic; Henrich et al., 2010). Fu-
ture research should aim to understand which and how perceptions of

personality and priorities combine and contribute to feelings of belong-
ing and majoring in psychology and philosophy for students from mi-
noritized groups and non-WEIRD samples. Finally, the correlational na-
ture of our data and analyses means that we cannot make claims about

causality; rather, our findings are consistent with a mechanistic view of
particular factors linking gender and major.
Conclusion
More women than men study psychology, and more men than

women study philosophy. This is striking given the two fields share his-
tory and overlapping subject matter. Feelings of fitting in are essential to

understanding undergraduate major choice and therefore these gender

gaps in academia. We empirically delineate the nuanced perceived per-
sonality and priority profiles of undergraduate students who feel they

belong in and chose to major in psychology vs. philosophy. Women were

less intellectually combative than men and prioritized money more. Peo-
ple who perceive themselves to be very empathizing but not systematiz-
ing and who prioritize money and status from their career feel they

belong in psychology, which predicts majoring in that field. People who

perceive themselves to be highly systematizing and intellectually com-
bative feel they belong in philosophy. These findings not only advance

theory but also inform development of efficacious interventions by un-
derscoring the essential role perceptions, especially individual differ-
ences in combative approaches to dialog, and priorities, especially with

respect to garnering wealth from a career, play in explaining this aca-
demic gender gap.