ABSTRACT
Objective: To explore the effectiveness of doll therapy (DT) on behavior, psychology and cognition among
older nursing home residents with dementia.
Methods: A systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted. Subgroup analyses were performed to
determine whether the intervention characteristics influenced effect sizes.
Results: Ten studies met the inclusion criteria and were selected for qualitative and quantitative synthesis.
The overall methodological quality was relatively high. DT significantly improved all behaviors [SMD=-0.42,
P=0.01], including agitation [SMD=-0.94, P<0.001], apathy, irritability and wandering, and psychological

states (i.e., pleasure, anxiety and depression). However, there was no significant difference in the improve-
ment of cognition. Subgroup analyses revealed that the DT process employing empathy dolls and coordinat-
ing with caregivers was more beneficial for improving all behaviors (P=0.01; P=0.02).

Conclusion: DT significantly reduced behavioral and psychological disturbances among older nursing home
residents with dementia. Specifically, administering empathy dolls and coordinating with caregivers may be
the most appropriate and effective option.
© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

Keywords:
Doll therapy
Older adults
Dementia
Behavior
Psychology
Cognition
Nursing home

Introduction
As the aging trend intensifies, the demands for primary medical
care and assistance with daily living among older adults living in
long-term care facilities and nursing homes (NHs) are expected to
increase. Aging is associated with varying degrees of deterioration in

cognitive function; approximately 48 % of older NH residents experi-
ence a clear-cut cognitive decline, and the dependency rate for care is

as high as 30 %.1,2 Institutionalized older adults are at greater risk of

dementia due to a multidimensional deterioration in cognitive func-
tion.3 As a neurodegenerative disease with many different etiologies,

the main types include Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and vascular demen-
tia, which both begin with short-term memory loss and advance to

long-term memory loss and confusion, decreased verbal and compre-
hension abilities, and changes in personality and behaviors.4 Accord-
ing to statistical data, more than 10 % of older adults have

Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (ADRD), and this preva-
lence increases to 32 % among older NH residents.5 With the exten-
sive losses from dementia, the burden and stress on caregivers and

the healthcare system can be overwhelming.
During the clinical progression of dementia, the appearance of

behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) can fur-
ther worsen the burden of the disease, and classic symptoms include

agitation, apathy, irritability, wandering, anxiety, depression, delu-
sions and hallucinations.6 The most common behavioral disturbance

among these symptoms is agitation, and the prevalence can be as

high as 35 % to 70 %.7 Previous studies have indicated that the preva-
lence of behavioral and psychological disorders ranges from 40 % to

50 % among older NH residents. More than 80 % of institutionalized
older adults with dementia experience the development of BPSD.8,9
These issues could be related to the individual’s unfulfilled needs due
to the environment provided by NHs. The conflicts and changes in
the psychosocial environment experienced during migration to NHs
can lead to behavioral and psychological disturbances, which is
known as “transfer trauma” or “relocation stress syndrome”.
10 BPSD
is associated with triggering falling, fracture, multiple trauma,

*Corresponding author.
E-mail address: slydl2007@163.com (L. Sha). 1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gerinurse.2023.10.025
0197-4572/$  see front matter © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

Geriatric Nursing 55 (2024) 119129
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Geriatric Nursing
journal homepage: www.gnjournal.com

disability and various accidents, which generate increased caregiver
burden, abuse of psychotropic drugs, poor quality of life and higher
rates of hospitalization and even mortality.8
Nonpharmacological therapies are considered the main method of

diminishing the risk of BPSD and include emotion-oriented interven-
tions (reminiscence therapy and reality orientation), sensory stimula-
tion interventions (acupuncture, music therapy, multisensory

stimulation therapy and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation),
behavior management techniques and psychosocial interventions
(animal-assisted therapy and multimodal exercises).11 Doll therapy
(DT) is also an effective nonpharmacological approach to reduce BPSD
among older adults with moderate to severe dementia and has the
advantages of being acceptable, affordable, available, and gradually
used in NHs.12 Previous systematic reviews have already indicated
the effectiveness of DT for promoting and maintaining the affective

relationship of attachment caregiving.13 A DT program helps partici-
pants sustain verbal communication skills and focus on the surround-
ing environment, and it prevents social withdrawal by improving and

maintaining social interaction.14 Furthermore, nonverbal communica-
tion, such as eye contact, touch, exploration and caregiving behaviors,

could also be increased by adopting care-related attitudes and activi-
ties,15 thereby promoting a positive psychological state and minimiz-
ing the appearance of challenging behaviors and psychologies.

The concept of attachment describes the potential mechanism of

the DT process in terms of its efficacy in the control of BPSD. Attach-
ment theory considers that the human tendency to seek closeness

and protection and the need to establish affective bonds when feeling
vulnerable or insecure is an expression of the innate motivational
system.16 This tendency and requirement could persist over the
whole life course and is particularly important for older NH residents
affected by dementia, as this population is often exposed to feelings

of personal vulnerability and loss, as well as experiences of separa-
tion.17 Therefore, BPSD might be interpreted as attachment requests,

while DT provides the possibility of establishing the affective bond
needed in a stressful situation to reduce behavioral and psychological
disturbances. The dolls are designed to recreate the sensation of
touching, staring at, and holding a child and thus can be perceived as
a translational object, catalyze participants’ attention and reduce
attachment requests.18 Through communication and interaction with
the dolls, participants can be prompted to substitute caregiving
behaviors for challenging behaviors.

A recent meta-analysis revealed that DT can overcome the limita-
tions of traditional interventions, improve the psychological state

and communication skills of patients with dementia, and diminish
challenging and aggressive behaviors.19 However, there is insufficient
evidence to support the effects on older NH residents with dementia.
Compared with community-dwelling or hospitalized individuals,

institutionalized older adults are more likely to experience a worsen-
ing of their behavioral and psychological conditions due to the partic-
ularity of the environment. Although a few studies have examined

the effects of DT on cognition,20 the available evidence is inadequate
to reach a consensus. No meta-analysis has summarized the effects of
DT on behavior, psychology and cognition among older NH residents
with dementia. Therefore, the purpose of this systematic review and
meta-analysis was to explore the effectiveness of DT in reducing
dementia-related behavioral and psychological disturbances as well
as ameliorating cognitive function among older adults with dementia
in NHs. Subgroup analyses were conducted based on intervention
characteristics (duration, cycle, types of dolls, and training mode and
control measures) to optimize the selection of DT programs.
Methods

This systematic review was reported in accordance with the Pre-
ferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis

(PRISMA) guidelines (Supplementary file 1). It was registered at the
International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO)
under registration number CRD42023452060.
Search strategy
The PubMed, Ovid (MEDLINE), Embase, Cochrane Library, CINAHL
(EbscoHOST), and Web of Science databases were searched from
inception until July 25, 2023. Google Scholar was also searched to

identify literature that may have been omitted. The search was con-
ducted using Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) and free text words,

and language or publication year restrictions were not applied. The
article type was restricted to randomized control trials (RCTs) and

quasiexperimental studies. Moreover, we evaluated the gray litera-
ture, the reference lists of the screened studies, and articles of for-
ward citations to identify additional eligible studies. The search

strategy details are presented in Supplementary file 2.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
The Population, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome, Study design
(PICOS) framework was used to formulate the selection criteria: (1)
The population was individuals aged >65 years who had a dementia
diagnosis in accordance with the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-V) and residing in NHs, long-term care or
assisted living facilities (residence duration 3 months); there were
no restrictions on cognitive conditions, but participants were
required to possess the motor skills necessary to interact with a doll
and sufficient visual and auditory function and communication skills.
(2) The intervention comprised DT, and the type of dolls was not
restricted (e.g., empathy dolls, lifelike dolls, and newborn or reborn
dolls). (3) The comparison groups received training that was not in

any form of DT, standard care or no intervention. (4) The primary out-
comes included any behavior-, psychology-, or cognition-related tar-
gets. (5) The eligible study designs were randomized controlled trials

(RCTs) or quasiexperimental studies.
The exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) participants with
severe sensory disorders; (2) dolls without a realistic appearance or
that were stuffed dolls; (3) unable to access the full text; (4) mixed

method design; (5) secondary analysis; (6) incomplete data for analy-
sis; and (7) conference abstracts, case reports, gray literature, study

protocols or review literature.
Study selection and data extraction
Two researchers initially separately screened the literature by

evaluating the titles and abstracts in accordance with the prede-
signed criteria. The literature that met the eligibility criteria was then

selected for full-text reading and targeted analysis. Disagreements
were resolved by consulting a third researcher to reach a consensus.
The following data were extracted: (1) basic information (author
names, publication year, country); (2) participant demographic data

(characteristics, age, sample size and sex); (3) intervention character-
istics (duration and cycle, types of dolls, training mode and control

measures); and (4) outcome measurements (behavior-, psychology-
and cognition-related indicators). All data were cross-checked by

reviewers.
Quality assessment
The Cochrane risk of bias tool was used to evaluate the quality of

the studies.21 Seven items were assessed: random sequence genera-
tion, allocation concealment, blinding of participants and personnel,

blinding of outcome assessment, incomplete outcome data, selective
reporting and other bias. Each item was rated as having “high risk”,

120 Y. Peng et al. / Geriatric Nursing 55 (2024) 119129

“unclear risk” or “low risk”. Studies that met all of the above criteria

were considered high-quality studies. Furthermore, the level of evi-
dence for outcome indicators was evaluated by the Grading of Rec-
ommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE)

approach.22 Each outcome was graded as very low, low, moderate or
high level.
Statistical analysis

RevMan 5.3 (Cochrane Collaboration, Oxford, UK) statistical soft-
ware was employed to perform the metaanalysis. The standard

mean difference (SMD) or mean difference (MD) was calculated for
continuous data, relative risks (RRs) were calculated for counting
data, and the effect size was assessed using 95 % confidence intervals
(CIs). The Q value and I

2 value were used to determine heterogeneity

among the studies. I

2 values of 25 %, 50 % and 75 % indicated low,
moderate and high heterogeneity, respectively. The fixed effect
model was applied if the heterogeneity among the results was not
significant (P0.1, I
2
<50 %); otherwise, the random effect model was

selected (P<0.1, I
2
>50 %). Stata 14.0 statistical software (StataCorp,

LLC, College Station, TX, USA) was used to analyze potential publica-
tion bias, and the trim and fill methods were also carried out for veri-
fication. Subgroup analyses were conducted to explore between-
study heterogeneity. Sensitivity analysis was performed to test the

reliability of the results. Descriptive analyses were used for statistical
data that could not be combined. P<0.05 was considered to indicate
statistical significance.

Results
Study selection
A total of 360 studies were initially selected by the predesigned
retrieval strategy from six databases and Google Scholar Search. After

removing 128 duplicate studies with EndNote software, the remain-
ing 232 studies were screened by title and abstract, and 179 studies

were excluded because they did not meet the eligibility criteria.

Then, 53 full-text studies were further screened, and 43 were subse-
quently excluded for several reasons: noncorrelation outcomes

(n=17); not RCTs or quasiexperimental studies (n=12); mixed method
designs (n=5); unable to access the full text (n=4); secondary analysis
of initial data (n=2); and incomplete data for meta-analysis (n=3).

Ultimately, 10 studies2332 were included for qualitative and quanti-
tative synthesis. The PRISMA flow diagram of the study selection pro-
cess is illustrated in Fig. 1.

Basic characteristics of studies and participants
The 10 included studies were published from 2006 to 2022 and
were conducted in Australia (n=1), Italy (n=3), Israel (n=1), Korea
(n=1), Switzerland (n=2), Turkey (n=1) and the United Kingdom

(n=1). A total of 573 older adults with dementia met the eligibility cri-
teria in the included studies, and the participants’ mean (SD) age

ranged from 82.4 (5.7)26 to 89.7 (8.4)28 years. The majority of partici-
pants were females (83.66 %), and two studies did not report the sex

proportion.26,27 Two studies were conducted in long-term care or

Fig. 1. PRISMA flow diagram of the study selection process.
Y. Peng et al. / Geriatric Nursing 55 (2024) 119129 121

social care facilities,28,32 one was performed at a residential care cen-
ter,27 two were carried out in other social institutions,25,26 and the

remainder were conducted in NHs. Most of the participants had mod-
erate to severe dementia, one study involved mild cognitive impair-
ments in older adults,26 and one included older adults suffering from

AD and vascular dementia.31 The participants’ effective adherence
rates ranged from 82.69 % to 100 %. The reasons for loss to follow-up

mainly included transfer (n=3),27 refusal to participate (n=3),24 neu-
tral or negative interaction with the doll (n=6),24 unwillingness to

continue (n=4),23 and terminal disease (n=1).23 The methodological
characteristics of the included studies are summarized in Table 1.
Doll therapy features
The dolls mainly included two types as intervening measures.

Three study designs involved empathy dolls, which were character-
ized as eliciting psychological reactions and providing opportunities

for pleasurable sensory experiences through recreating the sensa-
tions of touching, staring at and holding a child.23,25,31 Five studies

used lifelike dolls, which were made with smiles and eyes that could
open and close to convey calmness and peacefulness, but they did

not cry or laugh.24,2830,32 Five study designs reported that the train-
ing mode was coordinated with caregivers, who guided, supervised

and validated DT sessions, helping the participants to understand the
program structure and ensuring the safety and comfort of the
sessions.23,25,26,29,31 Five studies employed health education, and DT
applications were introduced through pictures, videos or brochures
within the acceptable understanding of the participants or led by a
trained research assistant.24,27,28,30,32 The duration of each training
session ranged from 0.5 to 4 hours, and the total intervention cycle

lasted from 2 to 72 weeks. Most of the control groups received stan-
dard care or no intervention, and the remaining studies were related

to sham intervention,23,31 standard treatment,24,28 and hand-
warmer.27 The DT features of the included studies are illustrated in

Table 1.
Outcome measurements
The main outcome measures focused on behavior, psychology and

cognition. The most common measurements were the Neuropsychi-
atric Inventory Scale (NPI) for evaluating behavioral outcomes.24 It

includes 12 behavioral domains, and the frequency (1=rarely to
4=very often) and severity (1=mild to 3=severe) are reported. The
final score is found by multiplying these values (0-144), with higher

scores indicating more behavioral disturbances. The Observed Emo-
tion Rating Scale (OERS) and Quality of Life in Late-Stage Dementia

(QUALID) were selected for the evaluation of psychological state.28,29
The Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE) was primarily used to
assess cognition.26 It rates 11 items under 5 domains (30-point scale),
with higher scores indicating more severe cognitive impairment.

Finally, we extricated the different outcome measurement informa-
tion according to similar structures and methods to create an out-
come indicator that could be assessed (Table 1).

Methodological quality

The included studies followed the principle of randomization allo-
cation, reasonable study design and baseline comparison; follow-up

loss and outcome measurement data were completely reported, and

the overall quality was at a high level. Among the 10 studies, 7 stud-
ies reported random sequence-generating methods that mainly

included drawing lots, computerized sequence generators, and com-
puter-based block randomization.2328,30 Five studies implemented

procedures for allocation concealment, mainly employing the sealed
envelope method.23,2528 To ensure the successful completion of the

DT program, only two studies fulfilled the blinding of participants
and interveners,25,28 but seven studies completed the assessor-blind
methods for data collection.2326,28,31,32 Almost all studies reported

complete data, indicating that there was minimal possibility of selec-
tive reporting bias or other bias. The quality assessment of the

included studies is summarized in Table 2. Levels of evidence for out-
come indicators were assessed as moderate (n=1) and low (n=2). The

low level of evidence was mainly ascribed to the high heterogeneity
and nonimplementation of allocation concealment and blinding
methods, and the sample size was limited. The levels of evidence are
illustrated in Supplementary file 3.
Meta-analysis of outcome measures

The primary indicators were behavior (agitation, apathy, irritabil-
ity and wandering), psychology (pleasure, anxiety and depression),

and cognition outcomes.
Behavior
The behavioral indicators included agitation, apathy, irritability
and wandering. Seven studies were compared in terms of whole
behavior, and one study was excluded from this meta-analysis
because it reported a different calculation method for the outcome
indicator.26 The results revealed that DT had a significant effect on
improving the overall behavior of older NH residents with dementia
[SMD=-0.42, 95 % CI (-0.74, -0.10), Z=2.54, P=0.01] (Fig. 2). Egger’s
tests revealed that there was no significant publication bias
(P=0.656). The trim-and-fill method imputed one study, and the
results were subjected to trim-and-fill adjustment [SMD=-0.529, 95 %
CI (-0.865, -0.192)], as shown in Table 3.
Agitation
Three studies were compared in terms of agitation.25,28,32 The
results showed that DT significantly improved the agitation of older
NH residents with dementia [SMD=-0.94, 95 % CI (-1.36, -0.51),
Z=4.27, P<0.001] (Fig. 2). Egger’s test revealed that there was no
potential publication bias (P=0.577), as shown in Table 3.
Apathy
Three studies compared participants’ apathy behavior. Molteni et
al.23 reported that DT significantly reduced the apathy of older adults
with dementia in NHs (z=-3.418, P<0.001). Santagata et al.24
observed a significant amelioration of apathy symptoms among the
participants through training (P=0.0011). Meanwhile, Balzotti et al.26
found that the participants’ interaction behaviors, social contacts and
verbalization were significantly enhanced (z=2.01, P=0.04).
Irritability
Three studies compared participants’ irritability behavior. Molteni
et al.23 reported that DT exerted a significant reduction in disruptive
and aggressive behaviors among older adults with dementia in NHs
(z=-2.679, P<0.05). Balzotti et al.26 verbalized that participants used

fewer swear words, shouted less, and exhibited less obsessive behav-
ior (z=2.02, P=0.04). Similarly, Shin et al.29 observed that the partici-
pants were less irritable while touching, looking at and holding the

lifelike doll (t=-16.31, P<0.01).
Wandering

Three studies compared participants’ wandering behavior. Mol-
teni et al.23 reported that DT significantly reduced the wandering of

older adults with dementia in NHs (z=-2.231, P<0.05). Santagata et
al.24 verbalized a significant improvement in wandering symptoms
(P=0.0207). Likewise, Shin et al.29 found that the episodes of erratic
wandering decreased among the participants (t=-17.76, P<0.01).

122 Y. Peng et al. / Geriatric Nursing 55 (2024) 119129

Table 1
Characteristics of the included studies
Author (year)
Country

Methods Participants Interventions Outcomes Measurement

Characteristics
Age (years)

Sample Size
(Male/Female)

Experimental Group Control Group Duration and Cycle

Molteni et al. (2022)23
Switzerland

Singleblinded RCT Older adults with dementia
living in nursing homes
EG: 86.9 § 5.9
CG: 88.4 § 5.5

Total=129
EG=64 (0/64)
CG=65 (0/65)

 Design: Doll Therapy
 Content: Empathy doll

(Recreating the sensation of touch-
ing, looking at, and holding a child)

 Mode: Coordinated with caregiver
(Guided and validated sessions)

Sham intervention:
Nonanthropomorphic
object
(Soft foam rubber cube

covered with a col-
ored and velvety tex-
tile)

Hours per session: 1
Total: 72 weeks

 Behavior: NPINH
 Apathy
 Irritability
 Wandering
 Psychology:
NPINH Distress
 Anxiety

Santagata et al. (2021)24
Italy

RCT Older nursing home resi-
dents with dementia

EG: 87.0 § 7.0
CG: 86.0 § 6.0

Total=52
EG=26 (5/21)
CG=26 (4/22)

 Design: Doll Therapy
 Content: Lifelike doll
 Mode: Health education
(Provide a brochure on BPSD in
dementia)

Standard treatment:
According to standard

clinical care in choos-
ing

pharmacological
intervention

Hours per session: 2
Total: 12 weeks

 Behavior: NPI
 Apathy
 Wandering
 Cognition: SPMSQ

Yilmaz et al. (2020)25
Turkey

Doubleblinded RCT Institutionalized older adults
with moderatetosevere
dementia
EG: 83.53 § 5.89
CG: 82.30 § 7.55

Total=29
EG=15 (5/10)
CG=14 (9/5)

 Design: Doll Therapy
 Content: Empathy doll
(The dolls were named, dressed, had
hats and socks on, and combed
their hair)
 Mode: Coordinated with caregiver
(Guided and supervised sessions)

No intervention Hours per session: 23
Total: 8 weeks

 Behavior: NPI
 Agitation: CMAI
 Cognition: SMMSE

Balzotti et al. (2019)26
Italy

RCT Older adults with mild cog-
nitive impairment living

in social institutions
EG1: 82.4 § 5.7
EG2: 87.8 § 6.6
CG: 86.9 § 5.2

Total=30
EG1=10
EG2=10
CG=10

 Design: EG1: Gesturalverbal
treatment
EG2: Doll Therapy
 Content: Five steps
 Mode: Coordinated with caregiver
(Presented, interacted and guided
sessions)

No intervention Hours per session: 1
Total: 12 weeks

 Behavior: NPIQ
 Apathy
 Irritability
 Psychology
 Depression
 Cognition: MMSE

Cantarella et al. (2018)27
Italy

RCT Older adults with severe

dementia living in a resi-
dential care center

EG: 85.31 § 6.21
CG: 87.23 § 5.03

Total=29
EG=16
CG=13

 Design: Doll Therapy

 Content: Discussion study proto-
colPretest asses-
smentObservation phase-

Experimental phasePosttest
assessment
 Mode: Health education

Handwarmer Hours per session: 1
Total: 4 weeks

 Behavior: NPIBPSD

Moyle et al. (2018)28
Australia

Doubleblinded RCT Older adults with dementia

in longterm care facili-
ties

EG: 86.1 § 8.6
CG: 89.7 § 8.4

Total=33
EG=18 (0/18)
CG=15 (0/15)

 Design: Doll Therapy
 Content: Lifelike doll
 Mode: Health education
(Trained research assistant introduce
and remove doll)

Standard facility care Hours per session: 0.5
Total: 3 weeks

 Behavior
 Agitation: CMAISF
 Psychology: OERS
 Pleasure
 Cognition: MMSE

Shin et al. (2015)29
Korea

Prepost Older nursing home resi-
dents with dementia

EG: 82.54 § 7.45

Total=62
EG=62 (9/53)

 Design: Doll Therapy
 Content: Lifelike doll
 Mode: Coordinated with caregiver
(Guided and feedback sessions)

NA Hours per session: 1
Total: 12 weeks

 Behavior: Ad hoc
questionnaire
 Irritability
 Wandering
 Psychology: QUALID
 Pleasure
 Anxiety
 Depression
(continued on next page)
Y. Peng et al. / Geriatric Nursing 55 (2024) 119
129 123

Psychology

Four studies reported the benefits of DT in providing psychologi-
cal support.23,26,28,29 Two of them found that DT had a significant

effect on positive psychology (i.e., pleasure) among older NH resi-
dents with dementia (Moyle et al., F=4.400, P=0.044; Shin et al., t=-

4.28, P<0.01).28,29 Four studies were compared in terms of negative
psychology (i.e., anxiety and depression). Two of them reported that
DT significantly diminished anxiety and discomfort (Molteni et al.,
z=-3.929, P<0.001; Shin et al., t=-18.05, P<0.01).23,29 Two studies
found significant improvements in depression (Balzotti et al., z=2.02,
P=0.04; Shin et al., t=-18.22, P<0.01).26,29
Cognition
Four studies were compared in terms of cognition.2426,28 The
results showed that DT had no significant effect on improving the
cognitive function of older adults with dementia in NHs [SMD=-0.23,
95 % CI (-0.57, 0.11), Z=1.33, P=0.18] (Fig. 2). Egger’s test revealed that
there was no potential publication bias (P=0.145). The trim-and-fill
adjustment [SMD=-0.286, 95 % CI (-0.575, -0.003)] was performed by
imputing one study, as shown in Table 3.
Subgroup analysis
Our results showed that DT had significant effects on behavior and

psychology among older NH residents with dementia. Therefore, sub-
group analyses were conducted to determine whether the interven-
tion characteristics influenced the effect sizes and to solve the

between-study heterogeneity. The subgroup analyses revealed that
the empathy doll was significantly superior to the lifelike doll in

improving overall behavior (P=0.01). The DT training mode, con-
ducted in coordination with caregivers, was more effective than

health education in improving behavior (P=0.02). However, the
effects did not differ based on training duration, cycle, or control
measures (Fig. 3).
Discussion
Given the intensification of the aging trend and the increasing
demand for institutionalized facilities, there is an urgent need for an
integrated, effective and sustainable option to provide psychological

and cognitive care to reduce behavioral and psychological disturban-
ces among older adults with dementia. DT is a nonpharmacological

technique with the aim of promoting attachment and companionship

among patients with dementia to improve their wellness and mini-
mize the appearance of challenging behaviors and psychologies.19

This meta-analysis was conducted to explore the effectiveness of DT
for improving behavior, psychology and cognition among older NH
residents with dementia. Ten studies reported that DT significantly
reduced behavioral disturbances and improved the psychological
state among institutionalized older adults with dementia. However,
there was no significant difference in the improvement of cognitive
function.
Effects of the DT process on behavioral disturbances

The emergence of BPSD seriously affects the presentation and pro-
gression of dementia among older NH residents and is associated

with greater functional impairment, accelerated cognitive decline
and increased caregiver burden. The current meta-analysis revealed
that the DT process significantly improved overall behavior, including
agitation, apathy, irritability and wandering, among older adults with
dementia in NHs. Our findings are in line with other studies reporting

Table 1

that DT was effective in decreasing negative behaviors such as

(Continued)
Author (year)
Country
Methods Participants Interventions Outcomes Measurement
Characteristics
Age (years)
Sample Size
(Male/Female)
Experimental Group Control Group Duration and Cycle

CohenMansfield
et al. (2015)30
Israel
Exploratory study Older adults with dementia
residing at a nursing home
EG: 85.9 § 8.6
CG: 85.9 § 8.6
Total=165
EG=89 (24/65)
CG=76 (21/55)
 Design: Doll Therapy
 Content: Lifelike doll
(Trial phase and treatment phase)
 Mode: Health education
No intervention Hours per session: 4
Total: 2 weeks
 Behavior: CAR

Pezzati et al. (2014)31
Switzerland

Pilot study Older nursing home resi-
dents with Alzheimer’s

disease and vascular demen-
tia

EG: 85.8 § 7.3
CG: 83.6 § 7.4
Total=10
EG=5 (1/4)
CG=5 (0/5)
 Design: Doll Therapy
 Content: Empathy doll

(Recreating the sensation of touch-
ing, looking at and holding a child)

 Mode: Coordinated with caregiver
Sham intervention:
Nonanthropomorphic
object
(Soft foam rubber cube

covered with a col-
ored and velvety tex-
tile)

Hours per session: 1
Total: 4 weeks
 Behavior: NPI

James et al. (2006)32
UK
Pilot study Older adults with dementia
living in an EMI social care
home
EG: 7594
CG: 7594
Total=34
EG=14 (2/12)
CG=20 (4/16)
 Design: Doll Therapy
 Content: Lifelike doll
(Pick up, hold and interact with
dolls)
 Mode: Health education

(Research staff introduce and feed-
back sessions)

No intervention Hours per session: 1
Total: 12 weeks
 Behavior: Ad hoc
questionnaire
 Agitation
Note: BPSD, Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia; CMAI, CohenMansfield Agitation Inventory Scale; CMAISF, CohenMansfield Agitation InventoryShort Form; CAR, Change Assessment Rating; CG, Control Group;
EG, Experimental Group; EMI, Elderly Mentally Ill; MMSE, MiniMental Status Examination; NPI, Neuropsychiatric Inventory Scale; NPIBPSD, Neuropsychiatric InventoryBPSD Scale; NPINH, Neuropsychiatric InventoryNursing
Home Scale; NPIQ, Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire; NA, Not Applicable; OERS, Observed Emotion Rating Scale; QUALID, Quality of Life in LateStage Dementia; RCT, Randomized Controlled Trial; SMMSE, Standardized Mini-
Mental Status Examination; SPMSQ, Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire.

124 Y. Peng et al. / Geriatric Nursing 55 (2024) 119129

agitation, apathy and aggression in patients with dementia.33 Mack-
enzie et al.15 pointed out that 93 % of caregivers of institutionalized

patients with dementia stated that DT decreased irritability and wan-
dering and improved attitude and communication skills. The retro-
spective study by Ellingford et al.34 reported that after the DT

process, more positive behaviors emerged, while negative behaviors,
such as agitation and aggression, declined.

The potential benefits can be ascribed to the dolls having the char-
acteristics of being cute, soft and comfortable, which could relax indi-
viduals and conjure affective resonance through contact and

Table 2
Quality assessment of included studies
Author (year) Random sequence
generation

Allocation
concealment

Blinding of participants
and personnel

Blinding of outcome
assessment

Incomplete
outcome data
Selective
reporting
Other bias
Molteni et al. (2022)23 low risk low risk high risk low risk low risk low risk low risk
Santagata et al. (2021)24 low risk unclear risk unclear risk low risk low risk low risk low risk
Yilmaz et al. (2020)25 low risk low risk low risk low risk low risk low risk low risk
Balzotti et al. (2019)26 low risk low risk unclear risk low risk low risk low risk low risk
Cantarella et al. (2018)27 low risk low risk high risk unclear risk low risk low risk low risk
Moyle et al. (2018)28 low risk low risk low risk low risk low risk low risk low risk
Shin et al. (2015)29 high risk high risk unclear risk unclear risk low risk unclear risk unclear risk
CohenMansfield et al. (2015)30 low risk unclear risk unclear risk unclear risk unclear risk low risk unclear risk
Pezzati et al. (2014)31 unclear risk unclear risk unclear risk low risk low risk low risk unclear risk
James et al. (2006)32 unclear risk unclear risk unclear risk low risk unclear risk unclear risk unclear risk

Fig. 2. Forest plots of main outcomes.

Table 3
Metaanalysis of outcome indicators included in the studies
Outcome indicators Study detail Effect measure Heterogeneity Publication bias

Studies (n) SMD (95 % CI) P value I2

( %) Egger P value Trimandfill imputed studies Trimandfill adjusted SMD (95 % CI)
Behavior 6 0.42 (0.74, 0.10) 0.01 51 0.656 1 0.529 (0.865, 0.192)
Agitation 3 0.94 (1.36, 0.51) <0.001 9 0.577 0 
Cognition 4 0.23 (0.57, 0.11) 0.18 0 0.145 1 0.286 (0.575, 0.003)
Y. Peng et al. / Geriatric Nursing 55 (2024) 119129 125

interaction with them. Agitation is regarded as a craving for attach-
ment, and the dolls provided as a therapeutic tool force participants

to focus on the care needs of the dolls, thereby reducing the occur-
rence of agitation and irritable behaviors.25 Additionally, the dolls

can be conceptualized as a relational subject, prompting a series of

proactive behaviors. This process enhances the participants’ attentive

abilities, achieves affective alternation and clearly allocates signifi-
cant relationships with the dolls in a safe environment, leading to the

activation of the caregiving system.35,36 Therefore, more frequent
and longer duration needs and desires for exploration were elicited

Fig. 3. Subgroup analysis of intervention characteristics.
126 Y. Peng et al. / Geriatric Nursing 55 (2024) 119129

with regard to the relational value, consequently decreasing apathic
and wandering behaviors. Protection and safety factors are essential
for individuals based on attachment theory. The DT process enables
communication, interaction and care between participants and dolls
and satisfies participants’ attachment needs, thus improving overall
behavior and decreasing behavioral disturbances.
Effects of the DT process on psychological state
Psychological disturbances are particularly pronounced among
older NH residents with dementia, placing a growing burden on the

health service system. The meta-analysis revealed that the DT pro-
cess significantly improved the psychological state of this population.

Our results are consistent with previous findings that DT can be used

for rehabilitative purposes to decrease the signs of psychological dis-
comfort (i.e., anxiety, depression and frustration) and to improve

pleasure-related emotions, expressive ability and communication
willingness among patients with moderate-to-severe dementia.37,38

The benefits can be attributed to the active interaction and communi-
cation with the dolls, which could motivate the participants to expe-
rience the positive psychologies associated with parent-baby

relationships again.31 From the perspective of neuroendocrinology
based on the attachment theory framework, there is a preference for
social familiarity when seeking to create supportive relationships
mediated by oxytocin, which is involved in the mechanism for

attachment formation and coping with stress.39 Therefore, DT con-
tributed to the formation of attachment relationships through pro-
gressive exposure, interaction and familiarity with the dolls, which

resulted in a reduced negative psychological state. Furthermore, DT

could create a therapeutic atmosphere to stimulate sensory percep-
tion, promoting the development of a positive psychological state,

and actively interacting with caregivers and the external
environment.29,40
Effects of the DT process on cognitive function
The progression of dementia is frequently accompanied by varying

degrees of cognitive decline, and the variability of cognitive perfor-
mance is affected by multiple factors, which are mainly associated

with poor stimulation of perceptive and executive function.41 The

meta-analysis showed that application of the DT process did not effec-
tively improve cognition among older NH residents with dementia,

which is in line with previous findings.38 The potential mechanism
was that improvements in cognition require attention, orientation,
memory, and construction tasks that activate different sensory media

to improve perceptive and executive functions, such as attention, reac-
tion time, short-term memory, and information processing speed. DT

was designed to reduce the participants’ attachment requests and
establish affective bonds.18 Although it helps to improve attention,

touching, staring at, and holding the dolls did not effectively amelio-
rate executive ability. However, another view considered that interact-
ing with dolls can stimulate perception and promote communication

with the external environment, which can activate the brain’s residual
memory to a certain extent.13 Therefore, we suggest incorporating

more basic studies in the future to observe the effect of DT on cogni-
tion among older NH residents with dementia.

Characteristics of interventions

The subgroup analyses revealed that the types of dolls and train-
ing mode of DT had moderating effects on the improvement of over-
all behavior among older NH residents with dementia. Therefore, in-
depth analyses were constructed to determine the optimal strategy.

Effects of the DT type on overall behavior
The types of dolls employed by the DT process are manifold and
varied, but the dominant types are empathy dolls and lifelike dolls.
The differences between design types may produce different effects
on the outcome indicators. Unexpected anecdotal findings from the
subgroup analysis showed that DT sessions employing empathy dolls
resulted in more significant improvement in all behaviors than those
using lifelike dolls. The potential mechanism is that the presentation

of empathy dolls elicits the participants’ psychological reactions, pro-
vides opportunities for pleasurable sensory experiences and pro-
motes caring and exploratory behaviors to build a caregiving

relationship between the participants and the doll.23,42,43 Consistent

with the theoretical framework of attachment, DT facilitates percep-
tions of security by creating a situation in which the participants are

gradually exposed to, interact with and become familiar with the
dolls, which contributes to the formation of attachment relationships,

reduces behavioral disturbances, and improves the participants’ com-
munication abilities, self-esteem and overall quality of life.31,44 In

contrast, the use of lifelike dolls is more concerned with calming
emotions to minimize the appearance of challenging behaviors.28,45
However, the establishment of affective bonds and anthropomorphic
relationships in their designs is not perfect, resulting in differences in
the generation of attachment;46 thus, the effects may be diminished.
Effects of the DT mode on overall behavior
To facilitate the implementation of the DT process, the design of

the training mode must account for participants’ personal rights, pref-
erences, attitudes and beliefs.29 Our subgroup analysis showed that

the DT process coordinated with caregivers had a more significant

effect on all behaviors than health education. Although previous stud-
ies have confirmed the effectiveness of pictures, videos, brochures

and guidance by trained research assistants,15,47 this cannot replace

the role of caregivers who introduce, guide and explain the proce-
dures to ensure correct execution and supervise, validate and feed-
back the significance of participants’ interaction with the dolls.25,26

While incrementally fostering autonomy, this process can also provide
a source of security to improve the quality of caregiving relationships.
Caregivers could recognize the participants’ interests, attitudes and
preferences, assist in decision-making and provide information and
support to ensure their rights to choose autonomously, guarantee the
security of the procedures and implement the person-centered
intervention.23,48 Based on the initial reactions of the participants,
engaging with the doll and providing necessary assistance may be the
optimal guidance to determine whether the approach is appropriate.
Respect for autonomy could resolve any ethical issues that may be

encountered in the DT process, such as viewing it as a childish behav-
ior and the difficulties in finding the target individuals for treatment.

Conversely, caregivers who regarded sessions as a daily duty gradu-
ally became acquainted with the intervention mechanisms and pro-
vided continuous supervision and feedback, which also helped to

reduce their distress and improves the quality of personalized care.49
Strengths and limitations
This review systematically elucidated the effectiveness of DT on
behavior, psychology and cognition among older NH residents with
dementia. The optimal scheme was determined through in-depth
analyses. Nevertheless, there are still some limitations to our study.
First, the high proportion of female participants may have triggered
sex-specific responses caused by the imbalance in the male‒female
ratio. Second, blinding is difficult to achieve because participants and
interveners need to know the DT process, which might bias the
results. Third, because of the lack of standardized tools to assess the
Y. Peng et al. / Geriatric Nursing 55 (2024) 119129 127

affective-relational dynamics of attachment caregiving among the
participants, some studies used only observational measures. Future

studies should develop standardized and objective outcome meas-
ures. Laboratory assessments can detect subtle changes that cannot

be measured by clinical tests to avoid subjective effects.50 Fourth, the
communications and interactions between health care professionals
and participants may produce a calming effect during the DT process;
therefore, the interaction effects are also difficult to identify. Finally,
the partial included studies merely employed descriptive analyses
due to methodological limitations, which may limit the credibility of
the results.
Conclusion
This systematic review and meta-analysis demonstrates that the
DT process significantly diminished behavioral disturbances and
improved the psychological state among older NH residents with

dementia, which can provide a reference for future research. How-
ever, the mechanism behind the effectiveness of DT on cognition

needs further exploration. The crucial findings were that employing
empathy dolls and coordinating with caregivers may be the most
appropriate and effective strategy. Currently, DT procedures are

advocated as a cost-efficient, sustainable and safe approach to ame-
liorate behavioral and psychological symptoms in older adults with

dementia. Future studies should focus on multicenter study design
and blind procedures, unify outcome indicators and precise measure
outcomes, and identify the interaction effects between health care
professionals and participants to further consolidate the effectiveness
of DT among older NH residents with dementia.