ABSTRACT
Parallel literatures in economics and psychology investigate why people voluntarily help others in
need. Economics has investigated an other-regarding motive (altruism) and a self-regarding
motive (warm-glow) and has used choice-based observations for inference. Psychology has

similarly examined other- and self-regarding motives and has developed survey-based measure-
ments to assess corresponding measures of empathic concern and a moral principle of care. This

paper explores whether and how elicitation of charitable motives from economics relate to

measurements from psychology. We find that when making donations to others in need, in-
dividuals with stronger empathic concern dispositions are more altruistic/other-regarding. Also,

those who more strongly endorse a moral principle of care are more motivated by warm-glow/

self-regard. The results connect two literatures, offer novel evidence from economics about the-
ories developed in psychology, and demonstrate that well-developed survey questions from

psychology can be predictive of the choice-based inference on altruistic and warm-glow moti-
vations from economics.

1. Introduction

Parallel literatures in economics and psychology investigate why people voluntarily help others in need. The literature in eco-
nomics has investigated an other-regarding motive (altruism; Becker, 1974) and a self-regarding motive (warm-glow; Andreoni, 1989;

1990) and has used choice-based observations to infer both (Ottoni-Wilhelm et al., 2017). The literature in psychology similarly has
investigated other- and self-regarding motives (Hoffman, 1975; Batson et al., 1978) and has developed survey-based measurements to
assess both (Davis, 1994; Bekkers and Ottoni-Wilhelm, 2016). It is not known, however, whether and how the motives elicited in the
two literatures relate to one another.
This paper provides the first evidence that, when making donations to others in need, elicitation of motives from economics
(altruism and warm-glow) are related to measurements from psychology (empathic concern and the principle of care). First, we find

that individuals who self-report stronger empathic concern dispositions are more altruistically motivated (more focused on an other-
regarding motive). Second, individuals who more strongly endorse a moral principle of care are found to be more warm-glow

motivated (more focused on a self-regarding motive).
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: vester@pitt.edu (L. Vesterlund).

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jebo

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2023.09.018
Received 21 February 2021; Received in revised form 9 September 2023; Accepted 14 September 2023

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 216 (2023) 354–365

355

The results are significant for three reasons. First, they suggest a direct connection between motives as understood in the two
literatures. This connection implies that progress in one field can be used to advance research in the other, and it can improve our
ability to communicate with each other to build interdisciplinary collaborations to investigate prosocial behavior. Nobel Laureate
Elinor Ostrom’s observation is relevant: the way economists and psychologists talk about motives is very different and we should seek
to understand how the definitions are related.1 The connection between the two ways of talking about motives also helps reduce the
considered motives to a set of primitives in the spirit of Fudenberg (2006), and can help limit the proliferation of models as discussed
by Chapman et al. (2020).
2

Second, the results offer novel evidence from economics about theories developed in psychology, specifically the empathy–altruism
hypothesis (e.g., Batson, 2011) and principlism (Batson, 1994; Hoffman, 2000). Third, the results suggest an approach to an important
practical problem, namely that scientific knowledge about altruistic and warm-glow motivations is rarely applied when designing
fundraising campaigns (Vesterlund, 2017).3 In part this is because there has not been a feasible, low-cost way to find out whether a
donor to a charitable organization is motivated by mostly altruism, mostly warm-glow, or a combination of the two. Our finding that
survey questions developed in psychology can predict choice-based inference of altruistic and warm-glow motives suggests a solution
to that problem and can help charities tailor their solicitation efforts to the motives of their donors.
2. Background
The economics literature has investigated the extent to which giving to others in need results from two motives: an other-regarding
motive (altruism) and a self-regarding motive (warm-glow). Throughout the paper we use these terms, altruism and warm-glow, as
they are defined in economics. In economics, giving motivated by altruism is defined to be the result of a donor’s objective to increase
the recipient’s well-being or the charity’s output, e.g., an objective to increase aid received by children in need (Becker, 1974). An
altruistically-motivated donor benefits from the charity’s increased output even when their objective (the charity’s increased output) is
accomplished by the giving done by other donors. Hence, economists model giving motivated by altruism as voluntary contributions to
a public good.
Giving motivated by warm-glow, in contrast, is defined in economics to be the result of a donor’s objective to increase a benefit from
the act of giving that is private to themselves. According to this definition the warm-glow benefit is enjoyed exclusively by the donor
(Andreoni, 1989; 1990). That private benefit motive could be to increase one’s own satisfaction, pride or status that comes from having
been the one who made the donation, and/or it could be the donor’s private benefit motive to alleviate their feelings of personal

distress or guilt that may be experienced when seeing another person in need (Ottoni-Wilhelm, 2017). Hence, as defined by econo-
mists, warm-glow is any self-regarding, private benefit motive. A donor motivated only by warm-glow does not benefit from, nor

respond to, increases in charity output from the giving done by other donors. Accordingly, economists model warm-glow giving as
acquiring a private good whose magnitude equals the amount of the gift (Andreoni, 1989; 1990).4
In economics, inference about altruism and warm-glow motives is based solely on the donation choices an individual makes. There
are no self-reported survey measurements involved. Instead, inference about (identification of) the two motives is obtained by
examining how much an individual’s actual donations change in response to changes in giving by others (Ottoni-Wilhelm et al., 2017).
The psychology literature has investigated empathic concern and moral principles as important motivators of help given to others
in need (e.g., Batson and Coke, 1981; Davis, 1994; Dovidio et al., 2006; Eisenberg, 1986; Schwartz, 2010). Empathic concern is a
sympathetic, compassionate emotional reaction to another’s need (Davis, 1994). There is extensive evidence of an association between

empathic concern and prosocial behavior, including giving to others in need (e.g., Davis, 1983a,b; Eisenberg and Miller, 1987). In-
dividual differences in the tendency to react with empathic concern have been elicited through self-reports to survey questions. Our

paper uses the common empathic concern scale developed by Davis, which is a sub-scale of the Inter-personal Reactivity Index (IRI;
Davis, 1994).
Moral principles of care are internalized values that one should help a person in need. Theory suggests that such principles motivate
prosocial behavior (Oliner and Oliner, 1988; Hoffman, 2000; Batson, 1994). The principle of care scale measures individual differences
in the endorsement of this principle and is associated with a wide-range of prosocial behaviors, including giving (Wilhelm and
1 Remarks made at the meeting of the working group on Testing Theoretical Models of Individual Behavior in Dynamic Social Dilemmas, Florida
State University, 2008. 2 Fudenberg (2006, p. 689) notes, “[B]efore behavioral theory can be integrated into mainstream economics, the many assumptions that underlie
its various models should eventually be reduced to the implications of a smaller set of more primitive assumptions.” 3 For example, how well matching donations or lotteries work as fundraising tools depend upon the relative strengths of altruism and warm-glow
motivations (Vesterlund, 2017; Hungerman & Ottoni-Wilhelm, 2021). 4 To be clear: it is a donor whose only motive is warm-glow who would not respond to increases in charity output made by others. In contrast,
economists think both altruism and warm-glow can motivate giving at the same time. Andreoni’s (1989, 1990) seminal contribution included
developing the mathematical structure to analyze this kind of dual–motive, altruism plus warm-glow model. Also see Ribar and Wilhelm (2002)
Ottoni-Wilhelm et al. (2017).
M. Ottoni-Wilhelm and L. Vesterlund

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 216 (2023) 354–365

356

Bekkers, 2010; Bekkers and Ottoni-Wilhelm, 2016).5
The purpose of the present study is to examine whether choice-based inferences from economics about altruism and warm-glow,
correlate with survey-based measures from psychology of empathic concern and moral principles of care. Research in economics finds
greater giving by individuals who have strong altruistic motives, strong warm-glow motives, or both (Ottoni-Wilhelm et al., 2017).
Research in psychology finds greater giving by individuals who have greater empathic concern and/or stronger principles of care
(Davis, 1983b; Eisenberg and Miller, 1987; Bekkers and Ottoni-Wilhelm, 2016). What is not clear is whether altruism and warm-glow
motives investigated by economists are related to the psychological constructs of empathic concern and principle of care.
For example, psychologists think that empathy causes giving, but they disagree on the mechanism through which empathy works.
On the one hand, Batson (2011) argues that the mechanism is that empathic concern increases the salience to us of the other person’s

well-being: the empathy–altruism hypothesis. That would suggest a relationship between empathic concern as measured by psy-
chologists and altruism as inferred by economists. On the other hand, Cialdini and co-authors argue that empathy increases the

salience of a self-regarding motive to reduce one’s own negative feelings.6 That would suggest (because giving to reduce one’s own
negative feelings is a private benefit) a relationship between empathic concern as measured by psychologists and warm-glow as
inferred by economists.7,8
A similar situation surrounds the principle of care. Batson (1994, 2010) presents both sides of the argument. It could be that
stronger endorsement of the principle of care is a “special feeling for another individual . . . then [the principle of] care would seem to
be a form of altruism” (Batson, 1994). Or it could be that acting in accordance with one’s principles is “only an instrumental goal
pursued as a means to reach the social and self-rewards associated with being—or appearing—moral” (Batson, 2010); hence in the
language of economists, a private benefit (warm-glow motive). Batson (1994) concluded: “To date, I do not think anyone knows
whether principlism is a distinct motivation or only a subtle and sophisticated form of egoism [self-regarding motive]” (square
brackets are our addition).
We will be able to shed light on these questions by determining how altruism and warm-glow motives investigated by economists
relate to empathic concern and principle of care. We focus on empathic concern and the principle of care for reasons drawn from the
above discussion of the psychology literature. First, theory predicts, and extensive evidence demonstrates, that empathic concern is
associated with prosocial behavior. Second, a central theory—the empathy–altruism hypothesis—predicts that empathic concern is
associated with altruistic motivation (to do prosocial behaviors). Third, theory predicts, and evidence demonstrates, that the principle
of care is associated with prosocial behavior. And there is a robustness reason: the empirical empathic concern–prosocial behavior
association often is very much weaker when the principle of care is included in the analysis (Wilhelm and Bekkers, 2010; Bekkers and
Ottoni-Wilhelm, 2016). Therefore, in an investigation of empathic concern, for robustness it is important to include the principle of
care.
While our main investigation centers on empathic concern and the principle of care, for robustness we will also examine the
potential impact of two other concepts commonly studied in the psychology literature: perspective taking and personal distress.
Perspective taking has been used to intensify empathic concern (Batson, 2011), and personal distress captures the potential private
benefit of reducing one’s own negative feelings (Piliavin et al., 1982). The IRI discussed above includes sub-scales for perspective
taking and personal distress (Davis, 1994).9
3. Methods
3.1. Experimental design
We use donation-decision data from the individualized-charity crowd-out experiment described in Ottoni-Wilhelm, Vesterlund,

5 Research in economics has recently begun to explore the concept of moral universalism (Enke et al., 2020; 2021) defined as “the extent to which
people exhibit the same level of altruism and trust towards strangers as towards in-group members”. While the concept seems closely related to the
moral principle of care (the “principle of care embodies universalism—care is to be extended to all people in need, both in-group and out-group
members”; Bekkers & Ottoni-Wilhelm, 2016), we are not aware of research that relates the two. It will be of interest to explore this connection

in future work. 6 Three types of negative feelings have been considered: sadness (the negative-state relief hypothesis; Cialdini et al., 1987); guilt (the empathy-
specific punishment hypothesis; Schaller and Cialdini, 1988); personal distress (the aversive-arousal reduction hypothesis; Piliavin, Dovidio,

Gaertner, and Clark, 1982). 7 Whether empathy causes giving as a result of altruism or warm-glow also has been discussed in the economics literature. For instance, Konow
(2010) argues that warm-glow, though not altruism, is emotionally-based. Andreoni and Rao (2011) argue that their results—getting dictators to put
themselves in the position of the recipients increases the generosity of the dictators—are consistent with either empathy evoking warm-glow

motives (e.g., making it harder to avoid feeling guilt), or with empathy evoking altruism (p. 519). Andreoni et al. (2017) interpret their evi-
dence of people avoiding Salvation Army bell-ringers who make eye-contact and verbally ask for a donation as attempting to regulate their empathy

which, left unregulated, would lead them to donate or suffer increased guilt, i.e., a private motive. An alternative explanation of their result is that
people seek to avoid social pressure (a different kind of private benefit); Spurlino (2022) finds evidence favoring a social pressure explanation. 8 As a first study exploring connections between motives to give as presented in the economics and psychology literatures, we are endeavoring to
keep simple our discussion of the psychology literature about the variety of self-regarding motives; see Ottoni-Wilhelm (2017) for a more detailed
discussion of altruism and private benefit/egoism/warm-glow motives to give as presented in economics and psychology. 9 The definitions of “empathic concern” and “personal distress” we use are in line with Batson (2009) and Singer and Klimecki (2014).
M. Ottoni-Wilhelm and L. Vesterlund

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 216 (2023) 354–365

357

and Xie (2017) to structurally estimate individual-specific altruism and warm-glow preference parameters. The design is a within-
subject lab experiment where undergraduates at the University of Pittsburgh are matched with a (future) child whose family has

just suffered the loss of their home in a fire. Participants are asked to make six donation decisions to buy books for a child (with one
decision being implemented). The books are distributed by the American Red Cross of Southwestern Pennsylvania. Participants are
informed that Red Cross trauma recovery experts will use the books to build a bridge to connect with the child to get them talking about
the situation they experienced. For each decision participants are given a budget and must decide how much to give to the child. Each
budget specifies the income the participant has, and the amount of money a research foundation already has given toward books for the
child. The participant’s income varies between $40 and $46, and how much a research foundation exogenously has contributed to the
Red Cross to buy books for the very same child varies between $4, $10, $28, and $34. Any amount donated by the participant will be
added to the funds donated by the research foundation to the child they are matched with. The six budgets each participant faced are:

($4, $46), ($10, $40), ($4, $40), ($28, $46), ($34, $40), and ($28, $40). For each individual, the response to variation in the foun-
dation’s exogenous gift and the participant’s endowed income is used to infer the individual-specific altruism and warm-glow pref-
erence parameters.10

There were N = 85 participants across six sessions. The experiment was double-blind and we selected at random in each session one
participant to monitor the experiment. After all participants in a session made their six decisions, one decision was selected randomly

for payout. Participants received their incomes ($40 or $46) minus how much they chose to give for the child’s books, plus a $5 show-
up fee. Funds donated to the child were used to purchase books and were packaged in individual bags and given to the affected child by

the Red Cross at the scene of the fire.
While the participants waited for the experimenters to calculate each participant’s payment, and how much to send to the Red
Cross, they completed a post-decision survey. The first questions were the 21 items from the IRI (Davis, 1994). Of primary interest was
the seven-item subscale measuring dispositional empathic concern: sample items are “I often have tender, concerned feelings for
people less fortunate than me” and “I don’t feel very sorry for other people when they are having problems” (reverse-coded). Responses
to the items (1-to-5 Likert scale from “Does describe me very well” to “Does not describe me very well”) are averaged to measure
empathic concern. The remaining IRI items form two additional sub-scales: perspective taking (sample item: “I sometimes try to
understand my friends better by imagining how things look from their perspective”) and personal distress (“In emergency situations, I
feel apprehensive and ill-at-ease”). As with the measure of empathic concern, both the perspective taking and person distress sub-scales
are dispositional measures.
Next were eight items that measure endorsement of a moral principle to help those in need (Bekkers and Ottoni-Wilhelm, 2016).
Sample items are “People should be willing to help others who are less fortunate” and “These days people need to look after themselves
and not overly worry about others” (reverse-coded). The principle of care captures normative thinking, whereas empathic concern
captures feelings, toward those in need. Keeping that difference in mind, the two constructs are otherwise similar, as the sample items
make clear. Following these dispositional measures were questions about demographics and religion. The complete survey is available
in Appendix A.
3.2. Inferring choice-based motives
To infer choice-based motives from economics, for each participant i we use variation in i’s decisions about how much to give to the
child across the six budgets they faced: b1 = ($4, $46), b2 = ($10, $40), b3 = ($4, $40), b4 = ($28, $46), b5 = ($34, $40), and b6 = ($28,
$40). For example, in budget b1 the participant knew the research foundation would give $4 for books for the child and that they (the
participant) had $46 income. Our notation to describe budget b1 is (G-i,b=1, wi,b=1) where G-i,b=1 = $4 is the foundation’s donation
toward the child’s books (and does not include the amount donated by participant i) and wi,b=1 = $46 is participant i’s income. Faced
with this budget, participant i chooses how much to give to the child (gi,b=1) and how much to keep for themselves (xi,b=1). The total
amount donated toward books for the child is G-i,b=1 + gi,b=1, which we denote Gb=1. And i’s giving plus amount kept for themselves
equals their income: gi,b=1 + xi,b=1 = wi,b=1.
All together each participant i faced six budgets (G-i,b, wi,b), b = 1, 2, . . ., 6, and made six decisions (gi,b, xi,b), which produced six
total amounts donated toward books for the child (Gb). Recall that the participant knew that one of these six decisions would be
randomly selected and implemented. To infer each participant i’s choice-based motives we use these data (G-i,b, wi,b, gi,b, xi,b; b = 1, 2, . .
., 6) to estimate i’s altruism (αi) and warm-glow (βi) preference parameters in a dual–motive, impure altruism model (Andreoni, 1989;
1990). Specifically, for each participant i we estimate αi and βi in the Cobb-Douglas utility function:
U
(
xi,b, Gb, gi,b
)
= αiln(Gb) + βiln(
gi,b
)
+ (1 − αi − βi)ln(
xi,b
)
, b = 1, 2, ⋯, 6 (1)
The first term in (1), αi ln(Gb), models participant i’s utility from the total amount donated toward books for the child, intended to
improve the child’s well-being; therefore, αi captures participant i’s altruistic motivation. The second term, βi ln(gi,b), models
participant i’s utility from the amount they themselves give, regardless of the total amount donated toward books for the child. Because

the second term models utility i gets from giving, but not from the child’s receiving, βi captures participant i’s private benefit warm-
glow motivation.

10 The altruism and warm-glow parameters are respectively αi and βi in equation (1) below. The complete set of experiment instructions is in on-
line Appendix A.

M. Ottoni-Wilhelm and L. Vesterlund

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 216 (2023) 354–365

358

The utility function (1) and the budget constraint gi,b + xi,b = wi,b lead to a first-order condition that when solved for gi, b yields:
gi,b = 1
2
[
(1 − βi)G− i,b + (αi + βi)Zi,b + {[(1 − βi)G− i,b + (αi + βi)Zi,b

]2 − 4αiG− i,bZi,b
}1/2
]
− G− i,b + vi,b (2)
where Zi,b ≡ Wi,b + G− i,b is social income (the sum of exogenously provided funds for participant i and the child in the social situation
established by budget b), and vib is random error. Eq. (2) is a regression of participant i’s choice gi,b on the exogenous variables G-i,b and
Zi,b, with αi and βi as the coefficients to be estimated. We use nonlinear Tobit to handle the nonlinearity in αi and βi, as well as the fact
that choices of gi,b are constrained by the budgets to be between $0 and $40 (b = 2, 3, 5, 6) or $46 (b = 1, 4). Eq. (2) is estimated
separately for each participant, yielding inference of αi and βi, again separately for each individual i.
11

From the individual-specific measures of αi and βi we form an altruism index:
τi ≡ αi
αi + βi

(3)

τi is a structural counterpart to Andreoni’s (1990) “altruism coefficient” used to rank the altruism of individuals.12 The αi +βi de-
nominator of (3) is a measure of i’s generosity; it captures, roughly speaking, the share of an individual’s income that is donated. Hence

the interpretation of τi is that it measures the strength of i’s altruism, holding i’s generosity constant.
Note the difference between the level of generosity and the motives causing that generosity. Consider an individual who is very
generous—by which we mean they donate a large share of their income: αi + βi is large. That large level of donation could be consistent
with strong altruistic motivation (that is τi ≈ 1), but it also could be consistent with very little altruistic motivation; that is, their large
generosity may instead be mostly due to warm-glow (τi ≈ 0). Now consider an individual who is not very generous: αi +βi small. That
small level of donation could be consistent with strong altruistic motivation (that is τi ≈ 1), but it also could be consistent with mostly
warm-glow, and very little altruistic, motivation (τi ≈ 0).
With the altruism index measuring the share of individual i’s generosity due to altruism, the rest is due to warm-glow: hence, γi ≡ 1
− τi is an index of the strength of i’s warm-glow, holding i’s donation, and thus generosity, constant.
3.3. Estimating the association between choice-based motives and survey measures of psychological dispositions
Because τi ∈ [0, 1] we estimate the association between the choice-based altruism index τi and the survey-based psychological
measures using Bernoulli quasi-maximum likelihood fractional logit (Wooldridge, 2010). The mean of τi conditional on the measures xi
is assumed to be:
E[ τi | xi] = exp(xi θ)

1 + exp(xi θ) (4)
where xi is a row vector of the psychological measures (and any other independent variables included in the analysis): xi = (empathic
concerni, principle of carei, . . .) and θ is the corresponding column vector of coefficients to be estimated. The logit right-hand-side of
(4) ensures that predicted τi conditional on xi will lie between 0 and 1.
The coefficients θ are estimated by maximizing the Bernoulli quasi-maximum likelihood function:
maxθ
∑N
i=1
{(1 − τi)ln[1 − E[τi|xi]] + τiln[E[τi|xi]]} (5)
where N is the number of participants in the experiment. The estimates ̂θ from (5) reveal the direction and statistical significance of the
association between the independent variables in xi and the altruism coefficient τi, but not the average partial effect. The average
partial effect is the partial derivative of E[τi | xi] in (4) with respect to each independent variable (evaluated at the estimates ̂θ). Using
empathic concern to illustrate:
∂ E[τi | xi]
∂ EC = exp(xi ̂θ)
[1 + exp(xi ̂θ)]2 ̂θEC (6)
where ̂θEC is the estimate on empathic concern from (5). Because the warm-glow index γi ≡ 1 − τi, the average partial effect on γ of the
11 Recall from Section 2 that according to the economics definition, giving motivated by warm-glow captures a wide set of private benefit motives
only enjoyed by the individual making the gift, such as self-satisfaction, pride, status, and/or the alleviation of negative feelings. A reviewer suggests
some people could get a general satisfaction just from giving books to another person regardless of the recipient’s situation; that private benefit to
the donor would be another type of warm-glow. Also notice that the choice-based inference of altruism and warm-glow (i.e., estimation of αi and βi
using (2)) hinges entirely on a participant’s donation decisions gi,b; inference of altruism and warm-glow is not based in any way on responses to
survey questions. 12 Andreoni’s (1990) altruism coefficient is a ratio of income effects that, under the fairly weak conditions described in Ribar and Wilhelm (2002),
converges to i’s own income effect as the exogenous giving by others to the public good increases.
M. Ottoni-Wilhelm and L. Vesterlund

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 216 (2023) 354–365

359

independent variables is just the negative of (6). Note that because the conditional mean function (4) is nonlinear in xi, the average
partial effects on τi in (6), and likewise on γi, are nonlinear in xi.
3.4. Theoretical predictions of the associations between choice-based motives and survey measures of dispositions
Section 2 described the different theoretical hypotheses put forward in the psychology literature about the relationship between
empathic concern (and the principle of care) and altruism (and private benefit/egoism/warm-glow). Table 1 summarizes the Section 2
discussion by presenting the predictions from the different theoretical hypotheses for the partial derivatives of the choice-based
altruism and warm-glow indices with respect to the psychological measures of dispositions.
Looking first at empathic concern, we see the prediction from the empathy–altruism hypothesis (Batson, 2011) in column 1 row 1.

Recall, the hypothesis is that empathic concern increases the salience of the other person’s well-being. Therefore, the empathy-
–altruism hypothesis predicts a positive association between empathic concern and the altruism index τ. The alternative hypothesis put

forward by Cialdini and co-authors (Cialdini et al., 1987; Schaller and Cialdini, 1988) that empathic concern increases the salience of a
self-regarding motive to reduce one’s own negative feelings is in column 2 row 2. This “empathic concern–private benefit/warm-glow
hypothesis” predicts a positive association between empathic concern and the warm-glow index.
Turning to the principle of care, recall from Section 2 that Batson developed two hypotheses. One is that the principle may be a form
of altruism (Batson, 1994); this would predict a positive association between the principle of care and the altruism index (column 1 row
3). The alternative hypothesis is that the principle of care is a “subtle . . . form of egoism” (Batson, 2010); this would predict a positive
association between the principle of care and the warm-glow index (column 2 row 4).
4. Results
Fig. 1 shows first for the choice-inferred motives from economics the histogram of the economics altruism index, τi. Among the
participants in the experiment, 37 were pure altruists (αi > 0, βi = 0; τi = 1), 32 were impure altruists (αi > 0, βi > 0; 0 < τi < 1), and
nine were pure warm-glow (αi = 0, βi > 0; τi = 0). For seven participants αi and βi could not be inferred.13 Table 2 presents descriptive
statistics. The average (median) τi is 0.79 (0.97). The average (median) for the 41 who were not pure altruists is 0.60 (0.85). The degree
of altruistic motivation in the donation setting examined in our experiment was strong, as is apparent from Fig. 1.
Looking next at the survey-based measurements from psychology, we form a single-factor scale from the seven empathic concern items
and find average empathic concern of 3.83 (SD = 0.71), and Cronbach’s α = 0.84.14 For the scale built from the eight principle of care
items (also a single-factor solution) the average is 4.02 (SD = 0.55) and Cronbach’s α = 0.82. The correlation between the empathic
concern and the principle of care is substantial: r = 0.66 (not shown in the table). Perspective taking (seven items) and personal distress
(seven items) each form single-factor scales with Cronbach’s αs = 0.79 and 0.78, respectively. Each of the four dispositional scales have
descriptive statistics similar to previous measurements (e.g., Batson et al., 1986; Bekkers and Ottoni-Wilhelm, 2016), and are internally
reliable. We standardize each scale for use in the models below to explore the extent to which measures from psychology are predictive
of the altruism index from economics.
Table 3 presents our main specifications – predictive models of the altruism index τi. The reported coefficients are point estimates
from fractional logit specifications (̂θ from (5)). Column 1 indicates that the altruism index, τi, is positively associated with empathic
concern (B = 1.11, SE = 0.37, p = .003). In sharp contrast, the association of τi with the principle of care is negative (B = − .89, SE =
0.37, p = .016), implying a positive association of the warm-glow index γi with the principle of care. Column 1 indicates that stronger

empathic concern is associated with altruistic motivation, and stronger endorsement of the principle of care is associated with warm-
glow motivation.

Fig. 2 shows the marginal effects based on the column 1 model; the slopes in the figure are average partial effects, as in (6). The
empathic concern–altruism relationship is in blue; the principle of care–warm-glow relationship is in red. The results indicate that a
one standard deviation increase in empathic concern around its mean level (− 0.5 to +0.5) is associated with a 0.17 higher altruism
index, about one-half of a standard deviation in τi. A one standard deviation increase in the principle of care around the mean level is
associated with a 0.13 higher warm-glow index, 37 percent of a γi standard deviation.15
Column 2 adds the perspective taking and personal distress dispositions to the model, and shows that neither are associated with
13 Six of these participants always made corner choices: one gave $0 in each of their six decisions, and five gave their entire endowment in each
decision. We can say that the one participant was minimally generous, and the five were maximally generous, in this experimental environment, but
we cannot say what motivated the generosity of the latter five. A seventh “almost maximally” generous participant gave their entire endowment in
four decisions and almost their entire endowment in two decisions; Tobit estimation of (1) did not converge for this participant. 14 That the seven items coalesce onto a single factor indicates that the seven items are consistent with each other, and therefore are measuring a
single underlying construct. Cronbach’s α then measures the correlation among the seven items. As long as the items form a single factor, it is
reasonable to use Cronbach’s α to assess the items’ internal reliability; see Cortina (1993) and Streiner (2003).
15 We examined the sensitivity of these results using an altruism index redefined to be αi/
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
α2
i + β2
i
√
(hence the denominator is a “distance-based”,

rather than linear, measurement of generosity); the results are nearly identical.
M. Ottoni-Wilhelm and L. Vesterlund

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 216 (2023) 354–365

360

Table 1
Theoretical predictions from the psychology literature of the associations between choice-based motives and survey
measures of dispositions.

Altruism index (τ) Warm-glow index (γ)

Psychological dispositions (1) (2)
Empathic concern ∂ E[τ | x]/ ∂ EC ∂ E[γ | x]/ ∂ EC
1. Batson (2011) þ 0c
2. Cialdini and co-authorsa 0b þ
Principle of care ∂ E[τ | x]/ ∂ PoC ∂ E[γ | x]/ ∂ PoC
3. Batson (1994) þ 0d
4. Batson (2010) 0d þ
Notes: Column 1 rows 1 and 2 present predictions from the psychology literature about how empathic concern is
associated with altruistic motivation. Row 1 is the empathy–altruism hypothesis (Batson, 2011) that predicts a positive
association between empathic concern and the altruism index τ. Row 2 is the alternative put forward by Cialdini and
co-authors that increased empathic concern does not evoke altruistic motivation (hence the “0′′ in column 1 row 2).
Instead, Cialdini and co-authors propose that increased empathic concern evokes a motivation to reduce one’s own
negative-feelings; hence the prediction is a positive association between empathic concern and the warm-glow index γ
as indicated in column 2 row 2.b,c.
Column 1 rows 3 and 4 present predictions from the psychology literature about how the principle of care is associated
with altruistic motivation. Row 3 is Batson’s (1994) hypothesis that principlism is a form of altruism; hence the
prediction is a positive association between the principle of care and the altruism index τ (column 1 row 3). Column 2
row 4 is Batson’s (2010) hypothesis that principlism may be a “subtle form of egoism”; hence the prediction is a
positive association between the principle of care and the warm-glow index γ (column 2 row 4).d
. a Cialdini et al. (1987); Schaller and Cialdini (1988). b The “0′′ in column 1 row 2 is Cialdini and co-authors’ predicted association between empathic concern and

altruistic motivation as they presented it in the psychology literature. Because the choice-based altruism and warm-
glow indices from economics are mechanically and negatively related (γ ≡ 1 − τ), Cialdini and co-authors’ prediction

that empathic concern is positively associated with the warm-glow index ∂ E[γ | x]/ ∂ EC > 0 (column 2 row 2) implies
for the altruism index ∂ E[τ | x]/ ∂ EC < 0. c Similar to the point just made in note b: the “0′′ in column 2 row 1 is Batson’s (2011) predicted association between
empathic concern and private benefit/egoism/warm-glow motivation as he presented it in the psychology literature.
Because of the negative relationship between the choice-based indices from economics (γ ≡ 1 − τ), Batson’s prediction
that empathic concern is positively associated with the altruism index ∂ E[τ | x]/ ∂ EC > 0 (column 1 row 1) implies for
the warm-glow index ∂ E[γ | x]/ ∂ EC < 0. d Similar to the points made in notes b and c: the “0′′ is Batson’s predicted association as presented in his article, but
the mechanical γ ≡ 1 − τ relationship implies a negative sign for the choice-based index.

Fig. 1. Histogram of the altruism index, τi. Notes: N = 9 pure warm-glow. N = 32 impure altruists. N = 37 pure altruists.
M. Ottoni-Wilhelm and L. Vesterlund

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 216 (2023) 354–365

361

Table 2
Descriptive statistics.

Mean Median Standard deviation Cronbach’s α

Altruism index (τi)
All participants (N = 78) 0.79 0.97 0.35 –
Not pure altruists (N = 41) 0.60 0.85 0.40 –
Empathic concern 3.83 3.86 0.71 0.84
Principle of care 4.02 4.13 0.55 0.82
Perspective taking 3.58 3.57 0.70 0.79
Personal distress 2.51 2.43 0.65 0.78
Notes: The sample size for the altruism index is N = 78. For the dispositions N = 85.
Table 3
Altruism index (τi) as a function of dispositions: fractional logit estimates.

Empathic concern and Principle of care Add Perspective taking and Personal distress Add religiosity and demographics
(1) (2) (3)

Empathic concern 1.11*** (0.37) [0.00] 1.14*** (0.40) [0.01] 1.63*** (0.63) [0.01]
Principle of care − 0.89** (0.37) [0.02] − 0.92** (0.35) [0.02] − 1.23** (0.63) [0.05]
Perspective taking – 0.00 (0.27) [0.99] − 0.27 (0.37) [0.47]
Personal distress – − 0.10 (0.30) [0.73] 0.32 (0.36) [0.39]
Number of independent
variables

2 4 27
Pseudo log-likelihood − 33.35 − 33.29 − 20.84
N 78 78 75
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses; p-values in square brackets. In column (3) estimates for sex, age, birth order, urban/rural, major, religiosity/
spirituality, denominational identity (Catholic, etc.), and past experience with house fires are not shown, but available in Appendix B.
*** p ≤ 0.01, ** p ≤ 0.05, * p ≤ 0.10.

Fig. 2. Altruism index (τi) as a function of empathic concern, and warm-glow index (γi) as a function of the principle of care: Marginal effects. Notes:
Shaded areas are 95 percent confidence intervals.
M. Ottoni-Wilhelm and L. Vesterlund

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 216 (2023) 354–365

362

the altruism index: the estimated coefficients are both economically and statistically insignificant (p-values = 0.99 and 0.73,
respectively).16 Adding perspective taking and personal distress slightly increases the estimates on empathic concern and the principle
of care. Column 3 adds the religiosity and demographic variables. The empathic concern and principle of care estimates are much
larger, but caution is in order as the model is likely over-fitted. The primary takeaway from the column 3 model is that controlling for
demographics and religiosity does not diminish the empathic concern–altruism and principle of care–warm-glow associations.17,18
Table 4 examines the altruism and warm-glow preference parameters themselves, as well as overall donation generosity αi + βi.
Column 1 presents fractional logit estimates of the economics altruism parameter (αi) as a function of psychology measures of empathic
concern, principle of care, perspective taking, and personal distress (the demographics and religiosity are not used as independent
variables). The association of αi with empathic concern is positive (B = 0.53, p = .002). The association with the principle of care is
negative, but not statistically significant (B = − .25, p = .118). In column 2 the dependent variable is the economics warm-glow
preference parameter (βi), which is negatively associated with empathic concern (B = − .93, p = .026) and positively associated
with the principle of care (B = 0.83, p = .020).19 The associations of αi with perspective taking and personal distress are close to zero
and not statistically significant; same with βi and the generosity results to be discussed next.
Altruism and warm-glow preference parameters αi and βi each mix measurement of motivation with measurement of generosity.
Columns 3–5 are models of overall generosity as measured by αi + βi, hence a measurement of generosity, regardless of motivation.
Column 3 shows that empathic concern, on its own, is positively associated with generosity; the estimate suggests that a one standard
deviation increase of empathic concern around its mean is associated with a one-quarter of a standard deviation increase in generosity.
Column 4 shows a similar result for principle of care, albeit the magnitude is a little smaller: an increase of one-fifth of a standard
deviation increase in generosity. The column 5 specification includes both dispositions and indicates positive associations, but the
coefficients are smaller and not statistically significant. However, this is because empathic concern and the principle of care are
strongly correlated with each other: a test of the joint hypothesis that both coefficients are zero is on the margin of significance at 10
percent (p = .11), and becomes significant (p = .052) if perspective taking and personal distress (neither of which are predictive of
generosity) are not included in the model.20
5. Discussion and conclusion
We explore the relationship between altruism and warm-glow motives for giving to those in need (as defined in the economics
literature) and empathic concern and principle of care motivations (from the psychology literature). Using incentivized charitable
giving decisions in a lab experiment, we use choice-based inference from economics to estimate the extent to which an individual’s

generosity is motivated by altruism and warm-glow. Using survey measures from the psychology literature we infer individual dis-
positions for empathic concern and moral principal of care. Intriguingly we find close relationships between the two measures. The

share of generosity due to altruistic motivation is associated with empathic concern (Table 1 column 1 row 1), and the share due to
warm-glow motivation is associated with endorsement of a moral principle to care for people in need (Table 1 column 2 row 4).
As a first study to explore the connection between what is seen as motivating giving in the economics and psychology literatures, we
demonstrate that motivations for prosocial behavior as understood in the two literatures are connected. This connection suggests that
advances in one discipline can be used to advance the other. One possible example for future research is using the experimental design
from economics that measures altruism and warm-glow preference parameters to investigate questions about emotions, cognition, and
prosocial behavior typically studied in psychology. A second example is using knowledge from psychology about self-regarding

16 A model with only perspective taking and personal distress as the independent variables (no empathic concern; no principle of care) also in-
dicates perspective taking and personal distress are both economically and statistically insignificant (B = .12, p = .617 and B = .05, p = .839,

respectively).
17 Coefficient estimates for the religiosity and demographic variables are available in Appendix B. If only the religiosity, spirituality, and
denominational identity variables are added, the empathic concern and the principle of care estimates get slightly stronger. If only the demographic
variables are added the estimates get much larger (B = 1.50 and − 1.23, respectively). Among these independent variables there are a few whose
association with the altruism index is significantly positive: age (recall 90 percent of the participants were 18-20 years old), religion being “not very”

important, spirituality being “not very” important, and growing up in urban or rural areas (compared to suburban). The implication is that warm-
glow motivation is associated with young age, religion (spirituality) being either important or “not at all” important, and growing up in suburban

areas.
18 Appendix C investigates the goodness-of-fit of empathic concern and the principle of care in predicting the altruism index. The main results are:
(i) perspective taking and personal distress do not enhance the model’s predictive capability; and (ii) the predictive capability of empathic concern
and the principle of care is roughly similar to that of the religiosity and demographic variables, despite religiosity and demographics being measured
with many more independent variables. 19 One might think that, because αi and βi are first measured/estimated for each individual and second regressed on empathic concerni and
principle of carei, that for the standard errors in columns 1 and 2 to be consistent, they need to be adjusted for the two steps or estimated all in one
step. Adjustment/one-step estimation is not necessary for consistent standard errors, however, because αi and βi (and τi) are dependent variables,
not generated regressors. That said, one-step estimation to get a “representative-agent” version of α and β is possible, and the results are qualitatively
similar; see Appendix B. 20 The results in columns (3) and (5) indicate that principle of care mediates 25 percent of the empathy-generosity relationship. This is in line with
the results of Bekkers and Ottoni-Wilhelm (2016). Their focus was on explaining the aggregate level of giving, while the focus here is on altruistic
and warm-glow motives for giving as defined in the economics literature.
M. Ottoni-Wilhelm and L. Vesterlund

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 216 (2023) 354–365

363

motivations for prosocial behavior (e.g., guilt, sadness) to investigate how these motivations are related to warm-glow motivated
charitable giving as measured in economics.
The results also provide novel evidence about whether empathic concern is related to other- or self-regarding motives. The evidence
from the psychology literature supporting a hypothesis that empathy is related to an other-regarding motive to help someone in need
has been comprehensively reviewed by Batson (2011).

21 The supporting evidence, however, has faced two criticisms: residuum and
sequential testing (Cialdini, 1991). The residuum criticism is that the experimental design used in psychology to test whether empathic
concern is other-regarding does not directly measure other-regarding motives; other-regarding motives are unmeasured residuals. The
sequential testing criticism is that the experimental design used in psychology (to build support for the hypothesis that empathy is
related to other-regarding motives) is to rule out one specific self-regarding alternative explanation at a time. For example, one
experiment is designed to rule out that empathy is related to self-regarding guilt (e.g., Batson et al., 1988), and another experiment is
designed to rule out that empathy is related to self-regarding sadness (e.g., Batson et al., 1981), etc. This leaves the nagging possibility
that, in any one psychology experiment, self-regarding alternative explanations not under experimental control (in that specific
experiment) may explain the results (instead of the results being evidence that empathy is related to unmeasured other-regarding

motives).22 The present evidence that empathic concern is associated with altruistic motivation as measured in the economics liter-
ature addresses both criticisms. Other-regarding motives are directly measured by the altruism preference parameter, addressing the

residuum criticism. And all self-regarding motivations are measured by the warm-glow parameter, addressing the sequential testing
criticism.
In addition, the results may provide important insights regarding principlism—engaging in prosocial behavior because of a

motivation to uphold a moral principle. Theory does not indicate whether principlism is a conduit through which one values the well-
being of another person (hence, other-regarding) or a “subtle and sophisticated form of egoism” in which the behavior is motivated by

the desire to uphold the principle (Batson, 1994, 2010). Our finding that the principle of care is associated with warm-glow suggests
that principlism is a self-regarding motivation. To our knowledge, this is the first evidence shedding light on whether principlism is a
self- or other-regarding motive.
Finally, the results suggest an approach to designing campaigns that use motivated fundraising. Charities already use relationship
building to understand the underlying motivations of donors one-on-one or in small groups (Breeze and Lloyd, 2013), but this
obviously cannot be done in a campaign intended to reach thousands of potential donors. However, the present results suggest that a
few survey questions measuring empathic concern and the principle of care may help determine which donors should be engaged with
an appeal based on altruism (e.g., emphasizing the benefits to the recipient, what the donor’s contribution will do, the public good
Table 4
Altruism and warm-glow preference parameters (αi and βi), and the αi + βi measure of generosity, as functions of empathic concern and the principle
of care.

Altruism parameter (αi) Warm-glow parameter

(βi)

Generosity: αi + βi

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)

Empathic concern 0.53*** (0.17) [0.00] − 0.93** (0.42) [0.03] 0.20** (0.10) [0.05] – 0.15 (0.14) [0.28]a
Principle of care − 0.25 (0.16) [0.12] 0.83** (0.36) [0.02] – 0.16* (0.09) [0.09] 0.08 (0.13) [0.56]a
Perspective taking − 0.03 (0.12) [0.81] − 0.01 (0.27) [0.98] − 0.01 (0.09) [0.84] 0.01 (0.08) [0.89] − 0.02 (0.09) [0.81]
Personal distress − 0.05 (0.11) [0.66] − 0.05 (0.26) [0.84] − 0.09 (0.07) [0.19] − 0.07 (0.07) [0.32] − 0.09 (0.07) [0.22]
Pseudo log-likelihood − 38.64 − 22.04 − 36.91 − 36.97 − 36.88
Pseudo-R2 b 0.03 0.08 0.01 0.01 0.01
“R2
” c 0.12 0.15 0.07 0.06 0.07
Mean-square error 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.03
Root mean-square
error

0.24 0.20 0.18 0.18 0.18
Notes: The estimates are from fractional logit models. The sample size is N = 78. *** p ≤ 0.01, ** p ≤ 0.05, * p ≤ 0.10. a A test of the joint significance of empathic concern and the principle of care has p = .11. b Pseudo-R2 = 1 – (L m/L 0) where L m is the model pseudo log-likelihood and L 0 is the pseudo log-likelihood from a model with only a constant
term.
c “R2
” = the squared correlation coefficient between the dependent variable and its prediction from the model.

21 Batson, Darley, and Coke (1978) originated this hypothesis, which came to be known in the psychology literature as the empathy–altruism
hypothesis. In this literature the definition of “altruism” is a motive that has “the ultimate goal of increasing another’s welfare” (Batson, 2011);
economists will note the similarity of this definition to Becker’s (1974). As the next footnote explains, a central criticism in the psychology literature
about the evidence that has been presented to support the empathy–altruism hypothesis is the evidence has not been based on a direct measure of
altruism/other-regarding motivation. 22 Cialdini (1991) succinctly summarizes the criticisms of the extant evidence in the psychology literature used to support the hypothesis that
empathy is related to an other-regarding motive to help: “what we have is evidence of a helping residuum that, presumably, is altruistically
mediated because when we partial out (one at a time) the explanatory power of each of the major egoistic [warm-glow] alternatives, helping
remains elevated. . . . the weakness of this approach is that the empathy–altruism hypothesis is supported indirectly, by default. This is of special
concern given the one-at-a-time pattern of assault on egoistic alternatives”; words in square brackets added by us. See Ottoni-Wilhelm (2017) for
details about the experimental design used in psychology.
M. Ottoni-Wilhelm and L. Vesterlund

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 216 (2023) 354–365

364

aspect of the charity’s work, etc.), and which donors should be engaged with a warm-glow appeal of some kind (e.g., emphasizing the
recognition you get from giving, encouragement to uphold a moral principle of care – “doing one’s bit”).23 Further such knowledge will
be critical when considering appeals that involve say lotteries or matches, both tools that are effective for altruistically inclined donors
but not for those motivated by warm-glow.
Limitations of the present results are first that, although the measurement of altruism and warm-glow is based on causal evidence
about how the participants’ donations respond to exogenous changes in net need, the evidence linking empathic concern and altruism,
and the principle of care and warm-glow, is correlational. However, while this is a problem for researchers, it is less so for practitioners
who want to predict the motives for giving and use that information to tailor campaigns to what motivates their donor base to give.
Information on which of their donors are altruistically-motivated, and which are warm-glow-motivated is critical for selecting the most
effective solicitation strategies.
Second, as the first study to explore the connection between the two literatures, there is plenty of additional work to be done to

demonstrate that the connection not only exists, but also that it generalizes to other environments. Our study documents the con-
nections between the economics and psychology measures of motivations in a particular environment, when undergraduates in a lab

setting give books to children who have lost a home. It will be of interest for future work to determine whether these relationships hold
more generally, such as with different charities and different potential donors. While these changes are likely to change the level of
donations (generosity), it is much less clear that they will change the measures that are corelated with one another. We see no reason
why the correlations between altruism and empathic concern, and between warm-glow and moral principles of care, should not extend
to a broader set of charities helping those in need, nor do we anticipate that the correlation will depend on donor demographics. This is
not to say that giving or preferences for giving do not vary by individual characteristics; we know that they do. Rather it is to say that
we do not anticipate that these changes will alter the set of measurements that are correlated. Similarly, while changes to the donation
environment, e.g., increasing social distance or making the request more abstract, are likely to change the amount donated, the level of
empathic concern,24 and the inferred motive for those donations, it is much less clear that these changes will eliminate the correlation
between empathic concern and altruism, and between moral principle of care and warm-glow. That is, changes in the donation setting
are likely to moderate the quantitative relationships, but we do not expect them to change the qualitative relationships.
Although the magnitudes of the empathic concern–altruism and principle of care–warm-glow correlations may vary across types of
charities, we think a next step in this research would be for charities, perhaps humanitarian charities at first, to collect survey data
measuring empathic concern and the principle of care from representative samples of their donor bases, and use donors’ self-reported

responses to tailor heterogeneous altruistic or warm-glow messages for their donor-specific fundraising appeals—“motivated fund-
raising.” The present paper provides an evidentiary basis on which to begin build interdisciplinary communication to advance this

research: communication between economists and psychologists about altruism and empathic concern, and about warm-low and the
principle of care.