Happiness is a valuable experience, and societies want their citizens to be happy. Although this
societal commitment seems laudable, overly emphasizing positivity (versus negativity) may create an unattainable emotion norm that ironically compromises individual well-being. In this multi-national
study (40 countries; 7443 participants), we investigate how societal pressure to be happy and not sad
predicts emotional, cognitive and clinical indicators of well-being around the world, and examine how
these relations difer as a function of countries’ national happiness levels (collected from the World
Happiness Report). Although detrimental well-being associations manifest for an average country,
the strength of these relations varies across countries. People’s felt societal pressure to be happy and
not sad is particularly linked to poor well-being in countries with a higher World Happiness Index.
Although the cross-sectional nature of our work prohibits causal conclusions, our fndings highlight
the correlational link between social emotion valuation and individual well-being, and suggest that
high national happiness levels may have downsides for some.

Humans value happiness. Around the world, individuals share a similar aspiration to lead a satisfying and happy
life1
, yet there is also an emerging recognition that this personal quest in itself may have well-being consequences.
Placing a premium on the value of positive emotion is known to paradoxically undermine our well-being, not
only as a function of how we value happiness ourselves2–4

, but also as a function of how the society we live in

emphasizes the importance of being happy5–7
.

Preliminary work suggests that the deleterious efects of pursuing happiness may vary across nations8,9
. Here,
we aim to provide a robust cross-national test of this (predictive) efect, investigating whether the experienced
social value placed on happiness ironically relates to poorer well-being across a large sample of nations. We
also examine a previously unexplored source of variance between countries, their global levels of self-reported
happiness, assessed with an established metric for societal well-being, the World Happiness Index (WHI10).
By examining the link between social valuation of emotion and well-being across the globe, we aim to provide
further insight into the important link between culture and individual emotional functioning11,12.
The societal pressure to be happy and subjective well‐being
Happiness or in scientifc terms, high subjective well-being13 is advantageous and desired, not in the least because
it signals accomplishment and optimal functioning14. For individuals, high subjective well-being is associated
with personal thriving in various life domains (e.g., work, social relations, physical health15–17). But also, for
nations more broadly, social indicators research consistently illustrates that happy inhabitants indicate societal
fourishing on economic, social, and political fronts18. Together, these favorable outcomes explain people’s natural
tendency to value happiness, both for themselves and their fellow man.
Although this social engagement with happiness appears admirable, recent research also highlights the risks
of overly promoting positive emotion, which can result in a felt social pressure to be happy19–23. Today, the
message that happiness is an important life goal is expressed at many diferent levels in modern societies, and

social-emotion research shows that people readily internalize these salient emotion standards24–26. On a macro-
level, for example, the prominence of happiness is evidenced explicitly by the numerous happiness coaches,

campaigns and self-help books that provide us with tips and tricks to cultivate the most positive mindset27, but
also more implicitly, by the seemingly perfect lives of infuencers on social media28, and the ubiquity of smiling
faces and happiness allusions in prime-time commercials and magazines29,30. On a micro-level, people may feel
pressured by their friends, family or colleagues to present themselves in an overly positive way, because these
close social contacts directly or indirectly encourage them to feel happy31,32. At last, this subjective experience
may even exist in the absence of concrete, objective antecedents33. Regardless of the specifc mechanism, this
one-sided social emphasis on happiness also risks simultaneously cultivating the perception that there is little
room for negativity9

. Indeed, in many modern societies or social groups, the natural experience of negative

emotion is easily stigmatized34, regarded as maladaptive for our mental well-being35, and as something trou-
blesome that instantly needs cure36,37. Also in this case, social others may shape the internal expectation that

negativity is undesired24,25. Nevertheless, occasional feelings of stress, sadness or anxiety are an inevitable reality
for every human being, making it virtually impossible to constantly comply with the apparent stringent norm
to be happy5
. Because this unattainable standard readily reveals discrepancies between our actual emotional life
and the emotions society apparently approves of, the perceived failure to meet social expectations is known to
trigger negative meta-emotions, pessimistic self-attitudes and ruminative responding7,20,38,39, with the resulting
ironic aggravation of these undesired emotional states40,41.
Eventually, the chronic failure to adhere to these unrealistic emotion standards may compromise people’s
well-being, as demonstrated by a large body of correlational and experimental research with various indicators

of subjective well-being13. Emotionally, the experimental induction to value happiness (e.g., via happiness-
extolling mock articles or verbal communication) paradoxically elicits blunted positive emotional responding to

enjoyable events3

, increased rumination over negative emotion7

, and stronger feelings of loneliness22. On the fip
side, experiencing societal pressure to avoid negativity (e.g., induced via mock articles that emphasize the social
cost of negative emotion) instigates increased negative emotion (both in terms of intensity and duration9
) and

equally triggers loneliness19. Cognitively, the societal valuation of positive emotions (and the perceived devalu-
ation of negative ones) relates to lower life satisfaction judgments for people who occasionally feel negative9,21.

Finally, in the clinical realm, excessively valuing positivity has been linked to more depressive symptoms in both
adolescent23 and adult samples42, and compared to healthy controls, depressed patients hold stronger beliefs
that they should feel more positive and less negative43. Within individuals, perceiving social pressure not to feel
negative paradoxically predicts increases in depressive symptomatology over time5
.

3
Vol.:(0123456789)

Scientifc Reports | (2022) 12:1514 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-04262-z
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

An important question that currently remains unanswered is to what extent the detrimental link between
the felt social pressure to be happy and individual well-being is universal versus culture-specifc11,12. Te vast
majority of cited studies are typically confned to single-nation (Western) samples (e.g., 5,19,20). In the few cases
where cultural variation is central to their investigation, researchers mainly relied on a small sample of diferent
geographical regions (e.g., United States, Germany, Russia, East Asia8

) or their study was limited to diferent
nationalities living in the same country (e.g., Australian and East Asian students living in Australia9
). Terefore,
a comprehensive and cross-national evaluation of the tendency to place a social premium on happiness and
the associated well-being problems with doing so, together with the examination of potential country-level
moderators, is a crucial next step in understanding the link between social emotion valuation and individual
adaptive functioning21.
Country‐level happiness: The World Happiness Index

Although there are many avenues through which the social value placed on happiness may be inadvertently com-
municated and reinforced, it is possible that the happiness seen in other members of society may aggravate the

ironic and negative (predictive) well-being efects of the felt social pressure to achieve personal happiness44–46.
Signs of human happiness can manifest in a multitude of ways47, and are not limited to the explicit expression of
overt joyful behavior alone (e.g., smiling facial expressions, positive verbal communication, etc.). Happiness is
also evident in other more subtle, implicit overt cues (e.g., having more social contact, engaging in pleasurable
activities, etc.), and fnally also includes truly covert experiences of joy and related behaviors (e.g., feeling happy,
providing a high happiness rating in a well-being survey, etc.).
If the happiness that is displayed by other citizens adds to the personal pressure to be happy or amplifes its
(predictive) well-being efects, then national levels of self-reported happiness within a given society could pick

up on this process. One of the most prominent and established barometers to evaluate national levels of self-
reported happiness is the WHI, an annual metric published by the Sustainable Development Solution Network

commissioned by the United Nations10. Based on the subjective happiness ratings of a large-scale and nationally
representative sample (collected by the Gallup World Poll48), this initiative aims to present a global ranking of
the most happy and unhappy nations in the world.
At its core, the WHI is thought to summarize how happy the average person within a country typically feels10.
However, it is equally possible that in countries in which citizens report higher levels of happiness, people, on
average, also experience more social pressure to be happy and not sad, because social norms prescribing the

value of happiness are elevated within these countries. If this hypothesis is correct, we should expect a meaning-
ful country-level relation between the average perceived social pressure to be happy within a country and its

national WHI score.
Second, the possibility exists that in countries with higher national happiness levels, people’s own personal
failure to (at times) live up to society’s prescribed standard to be happy may be accentuated by other people’s
actual happiness. Based on an integration of the previously cited body of socio-cultural6–8

and (meta-)emo-
tional38–43 research, it is possible that, for some individuals, the happiness seen in others may set up a forced

social comparison context44–46 in which discrepancies between one’s own emotional life and society’s perceived
expectations are more painfully apparent, because others seemingly comply with the prevailing standard to be
happy with little trouble. In this regard, social network research shows that happiness is distributed unequally
within societies49,50, and this imbalance in happiness could create the detrimental basis for social comparison
in a population. Indeed, for people who regularly experience negative emotion, being confronted with happy
people inevitably highlights the fact that their feelings are out of step with the emotional lives of others46, and this
self-other incongruity could aggravate the negative (predictive) well-being efects of the felt social pressure to
strive for happiness7,20,45. If this rationale is correct, we should expect that the negative relation between people’s
perceived social pressure to pursue happiness and their well-being is ironically stronger in high WHI countries.
The current study
To determine how the perceived social pressure to pursue happiness relates to people’s subjective well-being
around the world, we conducted a large-scale cross-national study (40 countries; 7,443 participants). In a frst
step, we examined whether the detrimental well-being associations of this felt pressure replicated across a wide
array of countries. We surveyed for both participants’ perceived social pressure to be happy51, as well as not to
be depressed or anxious20. Regarding their subjective well-being, we acknowledged the multi-componential
structure of this construct13,52. In line with established conventions on how to survey subjective well-being53, we

considered both emotional (i.e., the frequency and intensity of positive [PA] and negative afect [NA]), cogni-
tive (i.e., life satisfaction) and clinical indicators (i.e., depressive, anxiety-, and stress-related symptomatology).

In a second step, we examined the role of nations’ global happiness levels as a potential source of between-
country variance explaining the negative well-being associations of the felt social pressure to feel positive and

not negative. To this end, we obtained a global WHI score for each participating country from the World Hap-
piness Report10. Tis score is based on the average life evaluation of a nationally representative sample48, using

the Cantril Ladder54. Respondents are asked to evaluate the quality of their current life on a 11-rung ladder that
ranges from worst possible life (zero) to best possible life (ten). Consequently, the WHI is more an indication of

the average life satisfaction displayed by the inhabitants of a particular country, rather than their global subjec-
tive well-being10.

First, we explored whether higher national WHI scores are associated with stronger felt social pressure to be
happy and not anxious or depressed. Second, we examined the moderating role of countries’ WHI score on the
relation between this felt social pressure and people’s well-being. We hypothesized that the perceived societal
pressure to feel happy and not anxious or depressed ironically shows stronger detrimental relations with people’s

4

Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientifc Reports | (2022) 12:1514 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-04262-z
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

subjective well-being in high WHI nations. In these happy contexts, the painful observation that other people
are (seemingly) emotionally able to live up to society’s expectations when you yourself are unable to do so,
likely makes personal deviations from the desired emotion standard more salient24,44. In this sense, the negative
(predictive) well-being efects of the felt social pressure to strive for happiness (and avoid sadness) are likely to
be reinforced in high WHI countries.

To evaluate how the perceived societal pressure to feel (a) positive and (b) not negative is linked to poor sub-
jective well-being, we performed two (separate) series of multilevel models (participants nested within countries)

with the diferent subjective well-being indicators as outcomes of interest. Although previous work established a
causal and unidirectional efect of experiencing pressure to be happy and not sad on subjective well-being (e.g.,
7,9

), we acknowledge that our selection of outcomes and predictors in the current cross-sectional multilevel con-
text is somewhat arbitrary, and that we are ultimately restricted to correlational claims (but see SI 6, where we

show that this arbitrary decision does not impact our conclusions). For each model, we examined the random
efect distributions of these types of pressure in the prediction of well-being to see if detrimental links manifest

globally or whether nation-specifc relations appear. Next, to explore the role of countries’ WHI score, we exam-
ined its country-level relation with the average felt social pressure within a country, and evaluated its cross-level

interaction with people’s felt social pressure to see whether national happiness levels moderated the within-
country relations with well-being (see Methods for more detailed information about our statistical analyses).

Results

Descriptive statistics. Before answering the research questions central to this investigation, diferent ele-
ments in Table 1 deserve special consideration. First, within nations, the interrelation between the social pres-
sure to feel positive and not negative is moderately positive (r=0.54, p<0.001). Tis suggests a common factor

in the perceived social pressure to pursue positivity and to avoid negativity, but also underscores the unique-
ness of both constructs. Second, in line with previous research2–6,9,19,21,23, both types of social pressure show the

expected pattern of associations with all well-being indicators. Feeling social pressure to be happy and not sad is
associated with reduced life satisfaction, experiencing less frequent and intense positive, but more frequent and
intense negative emotions, and more symptoms of depression, anxiety and stress (|r|s≥0.05, ps≤0.050). Finally,
between countries, national WHI scores are only signifcantly related to countries’ average life satisfaction levels
(r=0.37, p=0.017); but not with emotional or clinical markers of well-being. Tis confrms the convergent (and

discriminant) validity of this country-level metric, because the WHI only assesses countries’ average life satisfac-
tion and not global subjective well-being.

Universal versus nation‐specifc subjective well‐being efects. Te fxed efects in Table 2 indicate
how the perceived social pressure to be happy and not anxious or depressed (separately) relate to all subjective

well-being markers for the average country in our sample. Tese results are fully in line with the average within-
nation correlations in Table 1. Within the average country, the social pressure to be happy and not sad is linked

to lower life satisfaction judgements (βs≤−0.05, ps≤0.024). Emotionally, experiencing these types of social pres-
sure relate to less frequent and intense positive, but more frequent and intense negative emotions (|β|s≥0.09,

Table 1. Summary statistics and correlations among all measures. ICC=Intra-class correlation, ratio of
between-country variance to total variance. Within- and between-country multilevel internal consistencies
(α) were calculated following79. Correlations below the diagonal represent the average within-country
correlation between people’s personal scores, correlations above the diagonal represent the between-country
correlations between country means (i.e., national scores). WHI=World Happiness Index; PA=Positive Afect;
NA=Negative Afect; SEHS=Social Expectancies to be Happy Scale; SEDAS=Social Expectancies not to feel
Depressed or Anxious Scale; *p≤.05, **p≤.01, ***p≤.001.

Variables

Descriptive statistics Correlations
Mean (SD) ICC α within α between 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 WHI

Cognitive subjective well-being
1. Life satisfaction 4.30 (1.29) .06 .80 .89 .19 − .05 .33 * .04 − .12 − .10 .16 .04 .30 .37 *
Emotional subjective well-being
2. PA Frequency 5.60 (1.54) .03 .74 .83 .47 *** − .35 * .85 *** − .51 *** − .37 * − .09 − .42 ** − .05 − .27 − .21
3. NA Frequency 4.74 (1.85) .08 .75 .92 − .38 *** − .43 *** − .29 .93 *** .64 *** .58 *** .64 *** .54*** .44 ** .23
4. PA Intensity 5.60 (1.66) .03 .77 .83 .39 *** .76 *** − .35 *** − .32 * − .40 * − .14 − .35 * .05 − .02 − .21
5. NA intensity 4.80 (1.96) .06 .77 .89 − .34 *** − .41 *** .82 *** − .22 *** .57 *** .49 ** .63 *** .48** .48 ** .29
Clinical subjective well-being
6. Depression 1.75 (0.65) .12 .83 .95 − .44 *** − .48 *** .63 *** − .39 *** .58 *** .90*** .88 *** .22 .26 .06
7. Anxiety 1.69 (0.60) .11 .78 .95 − .23 *** − .33 *** .55 *** − .25 *** .52 *** .63 *** .79 *** .32 * .21 − .06
8. Stress 2.00 (0.61) .12 .80 .95 − .25 *** − .40 *** .61 *** − .31 *** .58 *** .65 *** .70 *** .23 .41 ** .23
Perceived emotion norm
9. SEHS 6.01 (1.34) .11 .75 .94 − .05 * − .10 *** .27 *** − .08 ** .24 *** .21 *** .22 *** .24 *** .63 *** .23
10. SEDAS 5.56 (1.18) .11 .72 .95 − .21 *** − .23 *** .31 *** − .18 *** .29 *** .27 *** .23 *** .26 *** .54 *** .26

5
Vol.:(0123456789)

Scientifc Reports | (2022) 12:1514 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-04262-z
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

ps≤0.003, R%s=100%). Finally, in the clinical realm, feeling pressured to be happy and not sad predicts stronger
symptoms of depression, anxiety and general distress (βs≥0.09, ps<0.001). Te (predictive) well-being efects of
the felt social pressure not to feel negative are typically stronger than to feel positive.

However, when examining the variability in random efects, we observe considerable between-country hetero-
geneity for some well-being indicators. Tis points towards a potential moderating impact of critical nation-level

variables that exacerbate or alleviate the debilitating link between the felt social pressure to be happy and not
sad and personal well-being. In particular, country-specifc patterns appear for positive markers of subjective
well-being (i.e., life satisfaction, PA frequency and intensity). For these indicators, the average negative relation
with both types of social pressure signifcantly switches sign in 3 to 13 of the countries in our sample (and is
non-signifcant in 10 to 28 countries). In contrast, for negative markers of subjective well-being (i.e., clinical
symptoms, NA frequency and intensity), the average positive association with these types of pressure only
turns negative in maximum 1 country (and is non-signifcant in 4 to 8 countries), suggesting a more universal
detrimental association.
The moderating role of national happiness levels. To explain this between-country variability in

(predictive) well-being efects, we examine the role of nations’ global levels of self-reported happiness on the per-
ceived social pressure to be happy and not sad in two ways. First, inspecting the correlations above the diagonal

in Table 1, national WHI scores are not signifcantly related to the average felt societal pressure within a country
(rs≤0.23, ps≥0.112). Tus, contrary to what we predicted, the perceived societal norms that prescribe people to
feel happy and not anxious or depressed are not particularly elevated in countries with a high WHI score.
Second, however, when exploring the moderating impact of national happiness levels, we observe how the
within-country association between almost all subjective well-being indicators and the felt societal pressure to be
happy and not sad changes as a function of a country’s WHI score (see Fig. 1). For the perceived social pressure
to be happy, signifcant cross-level interactions with nations’ WHI score indicate that these efects are stronger

in countries that report higher levels of national happiness. In line with our hypothesis, perceiving social pres-
sure to be happy is linked to poorer subjective well-being in high WHI countries, both emotionally (|β|s≥0.07,

ps≤0.016, R%s≤87%), cognitively (β=−0.08, p=0.003) and clinically (βs≥0.03, ps≤0.006).
Indeed, as can be seen from Panel A in Fig. 2, comparing the countries in our sample with a lower (− 1 SD)
versus higher (+ 1 SD) WHI score, the link between people’s perceived social pressure to be happy and their

subjective well-being is substantially stronger in the latter. In terms of absolute magnitude diferences, the abso-
lute explanatory efect of the perceived social pressure to be happy in people’s well-being is almost always small

to non-existent in low WHI nations (|β|s≤0.08; except for the prediction of the frequency and intensity of NA
feelings). In contrast, in high WHI nations, the absolute predictive efect of this pressure ranges from 0.12 to
0.44. In terms of relative magnitude, the (absolute) diference in predictive efects between low and high WHI
countries is the smallest for the clinical indicators (diference in |β|s≤0.06), and the largest for the emotional
indicators of psychological well-being (diference in |β|s≥0.12).
Finally, the graphical visualization of these signifcant cross-level interactions in Fig. 3 (Panel A) further

unfolds the moderating impact of national WHI scores. Independent of WHI status, the perceived social pres-
sure to be happy predicts poorer subjective well-being in all indicators. However, in high WHI countries this

prediction is always stronger, generally producing larger diferences in well-being in happier nations between
people who experience little versus a great deal of social pressure to be happy.
Table 2. Exploring the universality of the detrimental well-being efects of the perceived social pressure to be
happy and not to be depressed or anxious. Each fxed efect represents the observed relation for the average
country in our sample. Te standard deviation of the random efects distribution describes the observed
variability around that average association. For each well-being variable, we report the number of signifcant
positive, signifcant negative and null-associations across countries (n=40 for the perceived social pressure to
be happy; n=39 for the perceived social pressure not to be depressed or anxious, due to an irreversible coding
error for Poland). Both types of pressure were within-country centered. Te number of associations that mirror
the fxed efect are bolded. PA=Positive Afect; NA=Negative Afect; *p≤.05, **p≤.01, ***p≤.001.
Perceived social pressure to be happy Perceived social pressure not to be depressed or anxious
Fixed efect SD random efects # Positive # Negative # Null Fixed efect SD random efects # Positive # Negative # Null

Cognitive subjective well-being
Life satisfaction − 0.05* 0.11 5 10 25 − 0.23*** 0.10 5 24 10
Emotional subjective well-being
PA Frequency − 0.11*** 0.14 4 14 22 − 0.27*** 0.15 13 18 8
NA Frequency 0.36*** 0.09 36 0 4 0.46*** 0.08 35 0 4
PA Intensity − 0.09** 0.13 3 10 27 − 0.24*** 0.13 3 28 8
NA intensity 0.36*** 0.10 32 0 8 0.46*** 0.09 34 0 5
Clinical subjective well-being
Depression 0.10*** 0.05 32 0 8 0.14*** 0.04 33 0 6
Anxiety 0.09*** 0.03 33 1 6 0.11*** 0.03 31 0 8
Stress 0.10*** 0.04 34 0 6 0.12*** 0.04 32 1 6

6

Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientifc Reports | (2022) 12:1514 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-04262-z
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

For the felt societal pressure not to be depressed or anxious, we observe a pattern of results that is highly

similar. Here, signifcant cross-level interactions with countries’ WHI score indicate that most negative (predic-
tive) well-being efects of participants’ perceived societal pressure to not feel negative are stronger in countries

that report higher levels of national happiness. Emotionally, in countries with a high WHI score, the perceived
societal pressure to avoid negative emotion shows stronger ties to a reduced experience of PA (both in terms
of frequency and intensity; βs≤−0.09, ps≤0.005, R%s≤93%) and an increased experience of NA (in terms of
intensity, β=0.07, p=0.017, R%=67%; but not frequency, β=0.04, p=0.146, R%=80%). Cognitively, this societal
pressure predicts poor life satisfaction, particularly in happy nations (β=−0.07, p=0.005). Clinically, in high WHI
countries, feeling socially pressured not to feel depressed or anxious paradoxically predicts more symptoms of
depression and general distress (βs≥0.03, ps≤0.003), but not anxiety (β=0.02, p=0.057).
An explicit comparison of lower (− 1 SD) versus higher (+ 1 SD) WHI nations in Fig. 2 (Panel B) further
elucidates the diferences in the strength of these within-country associations. For all well-being indicators, the
link with people’s perceived social pressure not to feel anxious or depressed is substantially weaker in low WHI
countries, except for the frequency of NA and anxiety symptoms. Regarding absolute magnitude diferences,
the (absolute) explanatory efect of the perceived social pressure not to feel negative in people’s well-being never
exceeds 0.19 in countries with a lower WHI score, except for the frequency and intensity of NA. In contrast, in
high WHI countries, the absolute signifcant predictive efect of this pressure is almost always higher, ranging
from 0.15 to 0.53. In terms of relative magnitude, the (absolute) diference in explanatory efects between low
and high WHI nations is smallest for anxiety symptoms (diference in β=0.03) and strongest for the frequency
in PA (diference in β=0.17).

Finally, Panel B in Fig. 3 again illustrates that, for all well-being indicators, people who experience social pres-
sure not to feel negative always report poorer subjective well-being, irrespective of their country’s WHI score.

However, in high WHI nations this link is usually stronger (except for NA frequency and anxiety symptoms),
Figure 1. Exploring the diferential role of the perceived social pressure (a) to be happy and (b) not to be
depressed or anxious in various well-being indicators as function of countries’ World Happiness Index (WHI).

Dots represent the magnitude of the fxed efects in each multilevel model (red=signifcant; gray=non-
signifcant with α=.05), error bars refer to the 95% confdence interval. Intercepts are not presented for optimal

visibility, but were always signifcant with ps≤.001. Original values, standard errors, test statistics and p-values
can be found in Supplementary Tables 2 and 3. PA=Positive Afect; NA=Negative Afect; LS=Life Satisfaction;
SEHS=Social Expectancies to be Happy Scale; SEDAS=Social Expectancies not to feel Depressed or Anxious
Scale.

7
Vol.:(0123456789)

Scientifc Reports | (2022) 12:1514 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-04262-z
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

which leads diferences in personal well-being in happier countries to be more extreme when comparing citizens
who perceive considerable versus little social pressure not to feel negative.
Discussion
Te present cross-national study set out to explore how the perceived social emotion norms to pursue positivity
and avert negativity play a role in people’s subjective well-being around the world. Breaking down well-being
into its diferent constituents13,52, we robustly demonstrated how the perceived societal premium on happiness

(and aversion of sadness) in most countries paradoxically relates to fewer and less intense experiences of posi-
tive emotions (with an opposite pattern for negative emotions), lower life satisfaction evaluations, and more

symptomatic complaints related to depression, anxiety and general distress.
However, we also demonstrated that these negative (predictive) well-being efects are not entirely universal,
corroborating the preliminary fndings of earlier studies8,9

. Particularly for positive markers of subjective well-
being, we observed how the (predictive) efects of the felt social pressure to be happy and not sad are subject to

substantial national diferences. Tat is, in a great number of countries, feeling socially pressured to be happy
and not sad was actually unrelated to positive well-being, and in a small minority an opposite association even
emerged. Here, the perceived social premium on happiness was related to higher life satisfaction evaluations, and
Figure 2. Te predictive efect of people’s perceived social pressure (A) to be happy and (B) not to be depressed
or anxious for all well-being indicators in high and low WHI countries (− 1/+1 SD). Te magnitude and
transparency of the edges corresponds with the strength of the association. Green lines represent positive
relations, red lines negative relations. Gray lines indicate that the cross-level interaction was non-signifcant,
meaning that the person-level relation between the perceived emotion norm and subjective well-being did
not meaningfully difer in low versus high WHI countries (also denoted with an *). WHI=World Happiness
Index; SEHS=Social Expectancies to be Happy Scale; SEDAS=Social Expectancies not to feel Depressed or
Anxious Scale; PA=Positive Afect; NA=Negative Afect; F=Frequency; I=Intensity; LS=Life Satisfaction;
DEP=Depressive symptoms, ANX=Anxiety symptoms, STR=Stress symptoms.

8

Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientifc Reports | (2022) 12:1514 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-04262-z
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

a more frequent and intense experience of positive emotion. In contrast, for negative indicators of subjective well-
being, the (predictive) efects of the felt social pressure to be happy and not sad were more universally negative.

In almost all countries, experiencing pressure to be happy and not sad was related to more and stronger negative
feelings, and stronger symptoms of depression, anxiety and stress. Tis diference suggests that the presence of

negative well-being (e.g., frequent and intense negative emotions or psychopathological symptoms) likely dis-
closes discrepancies with the prevailing societal emotion standard that are more salient, compared to the absence

of positive well-being (e.g., little to low positive emotions or poor life satisfaction). Tis fnding coincides with
Figure 3. Unfolding all cross-level interactions between countries’ WHI score and participants’ perceived social

pressure (a) to be happy and (b) not to be depressed or anxious in the prediction of individual subjective well-
being. To distinguish between low (− 1 SD) and high (+1 SD) values, we adopted the average within-country

SD for person-level predictors, and the between-country SD for countries’ WHI score. Gray plots indicate
that the cross-level interaction was not signifcant (also denoted with an *). WHI=World Happiness Index;
SEHS=Social Expectancies to be Happy Scale; SEDAS=Social Expectancies not to feel Depressed or Anxious
Scale; PA=Positive Afect; NA=Negative Afect; LS=Life Satisfaction.

9
Vol.:(0123456789)

Scientifc Reports | (2022) 12:1514 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-04262-z
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

the observation that experiencing social pressure to avoid negativity overall typically shows poorer well-being
associations than the pressure to pursue positivity.
Exploring the factors that drive this country-level variability in (predictive) well-being efects, we found that
feeling pressured to be happy and not sad is particularly associated with poor well-being in countries with high
national happiness levels. Although these perceived happiness norms in themselves are, on average, not more
elevated among citizens of high-ranked WHI nations, the personal belief that social others view the experience
of positive emotions as a key indicator of success in life (and devalue negative emotions) is found to hold an
especially negative relation to people’s well-being in happier countries.
Regarding actual (causal) process explanations, the cross-sectional nature of our data prevents us to uncover
the exact explanatory mechanisms underlying the current moderation, but the idea that the happiness seen in
others in high WHI countries could ironically amplify the negative relation between the perceived social pressure
to be happy and personal well-being opens up multiple avenues for future research. For example, it is possible that
citizens of high WHI nations are typically more expressive of their happiness, as previous cross-cultural studies
established national diferences in emotional display rules55. Not only would this explain a higher WHI ranking
for these countries, more overt signs of happiness would also produce a stronger detrimental basis for negative
social comparison in unhappy people7,46). Second, it could be that high WHI countries also sufer from more
happiness inequality49,50. Nation-level aggregates do not reveal how happiness is distributed within a country53,

but a stronger imbalance in happiness would explain why unhappy individuals feel compelled to align their feel-
ings with those of the majority group. If true, this perceived social pressure would not only further impair these

outcasts’ personal well-being, it would also again lead to more happiness inequality, ultimately contributing to
a self-sustaining feedback mechanism.
Regardless of the specifc mechanism, our fndings emphasize that an exclusive focus or overreliance on
national aggregates may be misleading to inform well-being policy, a concern that has been repeatedly expressed
by the social indicator movement in the past53,56. Although the WHI is meaningfully related to countries’ average
life satisfaction levels, underscoring the construct validity of this index on a national level (i.e., this metric does
not echo country-level averages in emotional or clinical well-being10), the present results suggest that the WHI
may be less equipped to provide insight into the subjective well-being of specifc citizens. Indeed, we found that a
higher WHI ranking does not necessarily indicate higher subjective well-being for everyone within that country,
as the normative emotion processes in high WHI societies may paradoxically work against individual well-being
for some. Overall, these fndings further illustrate the concern that considerable between-person heterogeneity
may undermine the unifying quality of country-level metrics56,57, and highlight the importance of additionally
considering the within-nation processes that may explain this variability.
Finally, with respect to the potential societal implications of our fndings, nationwide (psycho-)educational
campaigns that put the pressing need to be happy in perspective, while also acknowledging the valuable role
of negative emotion (particularly in high WHI nations), could have benefcial efects for people’s psychological
well-being in the long run2,5

. In this way, the outdated yet dominant societal discourse that promotes a one-sided
embrace of one’s emotions can make way for an updated version, in which people learn to appreciate the full
scope of their emotional lives, both positive and negative.
Limitations. Te current fndings should be considered in the light of some limitations. First, in addition to
the fact that our claims about the specifc process mechanisms underlying our results remain speculative on the
basis of correlational data alone, we acknowledge that country-level WHI scores may not provide the optimal

window of analysis to fttingly establish negative social comparison. Although the WHI clearly captures ele-
ments of this referential process at a macro-level, future studies with a more fne-grained resolution are needed

to complement the current work with fndings from micro-level contexts (i.e., social comparison of happiness as
a result of immediate social interactions). Previous work on the prevalence of suicide in happy places has shown
that both perspectives do not always converge in their results58,59, and other paradoxical patterns described in the
happiness literature (e.g., the Easterlin Paradox60) have highlighted the critical importance of explicitly clarifying

the level of analysis when interpreting results. In this regard, future studies could also beneft from explicitly dis-
tinguishing between diferent potential sources that shape people’s perceived social pressure to be happy and not

sad (e.g., macro- versus micro-level, implicit versus explicit, objective antecedents versus subjective appraisals,
etc.). Although this pressure is likely multi-determined, the instruments currently available do not diferentiate
between these diferent factors.
Second, to assess the average life satisfaction in our own sample, we did not include the original WHI Cantril

Ladder10,54, but rather relied on Diener’s traditional Satisfaction With Life rating scale61. Although both instru-
ments are known to correlate highly62, we cannot simply generalize our fndings to other types of well-being

assessments. Similarly, compared to the diverse and nationally representative samples in WHI research10, this

multi-national study mainly comprised a student population, limiting the generalizability of the found associa-
tions to other sub-samples within a country. For example, with respect to diferent age groups, the factors that

contribute to a happy life are known to change remarkably across the life span63, and adolescent students are gen-
erally more susceptible to the expectations of social others or the infuence of peers compared to adults (e.g.,64,65).

Surveying a more balanced research sample and exploring the moderating role of other theoretically relevant
demographic covariates (both on an individual and societal level) will further elucidate the comprehensiveness
of the established well-being associations.
Finally, as is the case in all cross-national studies, expecting full language and translation equivalence across

countries is difcult (e.g., some emotion words may be interpreted slightly diferent around the world66). Nev-
ertheless, national inequivalence would likely introduce more measurement noise to the data, acting against

establishing meaningful associations.

10

Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientifc Reports | (2022) 12:1514 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-04262-z
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Materials and methods

Participants. Te present research project was part of a larger cross-national study investigating how indi-
vidual and cultural values infuence emotional well-being and moral attitudes around the world. Te initiating

sites were based in Australia and Belgium, and the associated researchers contacted potential collaborators via

e-mail, in which they outlined the aims and nature of the study, and provided an initial copy of the survey mate-
rials (in English). Upon agreeing to participate, all collaborating sites arranged the requisite ethical approval for

data collection at their host institution, and translated the questionnaires into their native language (see SI 1 for
more information about this process). Te original study was approved by the Psychological Sciences Human

Ethics Advisory Group in Australia (1647465.2) and the Social-Societal Ethical Committee KU Leuven in Bel-
gium (G-2017 10 954). Each collaborating site was asked to enroll a minimum sample of 100 university students

that originated from the nation of testing (e.g., no international or exchange students).

In the end, we collected data from 40 diferent countries (42 sites), adequately covering all populated con-
tinents in the world (i.e., Europe n = 17; Asia n = 10; Africa n = 4; South America n = 4; North America n = 3;

Oceania n=2). A world map with all participating countries can be found in SI 2, together with the fnal sample
size for each site. On average, each country collected 186 participants (SD=129), with a total sample of 7,443
participants taking part in the study (Mage=21.81, SDage=5.60). Te balance of gender identifcation consisted
of 32% men, 61.2% women, 0.3% other, and 6.5% unspecifed, and the majority of participants (87.6%) were
enrolled in a psychology course at the time of the study. All participants provided informed consent.
Procedure and materials. In each country, we adopted a standardized survey battery that was locally
translated into participants’ native language (and back-translated by some but not all host institutions; see SI
1 for more information) to evaluate their subjective well-being, alongside their perception of the predominant
emotion norms in their country. Participants were only sampled a single time. Next, accessing the public data of
the 2019 World Happiness Report, we obtained a global WHI score for each participating country10. Summary
statistics and correlations among all measures can be found in Table 1.
Emotional well‐being components: natural positive and negative afect. To evaluate the emotional components

in subjective well-being, the distinct and global experience of positive (PA) and negative afect (NA67), we com-
piled a list of four positive (happy, joyful, relaxed, calm) and four negative (sad, depressed, stressed, anxious)

emotion items, respectively. Te selection of these emotions was based on the circumplex model of afect68
to ensure an adequate representation of diferent arousal levels. We invited participants to rate their everyday
emotional experience both in terms of frequency (How ofen have you experienced the following emotion during
the last month?) and intensity (How intense was your experience of the following emotion?), as both dimensions
are known to relate diferently to subjective well-being69. For each emotion item, participants provided their
response on a 9-point Likert scale that ranged from none of the time (one) to all of the time (nine) for frequency,
and from very mild (one) to very intense (nine) for intensity. We averaged same-valenced emotion ratings for
each dimension to create a score for PA and NA frequency, and PA and NA intensity.
Cognitive well‐being component: satisfaction with life. We assessed life satisfaction with the Satisfaction with
Life scale61. Tis 5-item questionnaire is designed to capture a broad and integrative evaluation of people’s life
(e.g., Te conditions of my life are excellent.), and concerns the cognitive-judgmental component in subjective
well-being13. Participants rated each item on a 7-point Likert scale, ranging from strongly disagree (one) to
strongly agree (seven), and we averaged across items to get a global life satisfaction score.

Clinical well‐being components: mood complaints. To determine the presence of mood-related symptoma-
tology, experiential factors that usually undermine high subjective well-being52, participants had to complete

the Depression Anxiety and Stress Scale70. Tis 21-item survey is based on the tripartite model of anxiety and
depression71, and consists of three 7-item subscales that aim to diferentiate between prototypical symptoms of
depression (e.g., I felt down-hearted and blue.), anxiety (e.g., I felt scared without any good reason.) and general
distress (e.g., I tended to over-react to situations.70). Participants indicated how frequently they experienced each
item over the last week on a 4-point scale that ranged from not at all (zero) to most of the time (three), and we
averaged responses per subscale to get an indication of each symptom type severity.
Perceived emotion norms. We assessed participants’ perceived societal expectancies to feel positive with the
Social Expectancies about Happiness (SEHS51), and not to feel negative with the Social Expectancies about
Depression and Anxiety Scale (SEDAS20). Te SEHS is a 9-item survey that evaluates people’s global idea about
how they think their society expects people to pursue positivity (e.g., I think that society places a great deal of
pressure on people to feel happy. or People in my society view people who feel happy as more valuable.; see SI 3 for
the full item list). Conversely, the SEDAS is a 13-item instrument that reveals people’s general beliefs about how
they think their society disapproves of negative emotional states such as depression or anxiety (e.g., I think soci‐
ety tends to place a lot of pressure on people not to feel depressed or anxious. or I think society accepts people who
feel depressed or anxious as normal. [reversed]). For both scales, participants rated each statement on a 9-point
Likert scale that ranged from strongly disagree (one) to strongly agree (nine). We averaged across all items (afer
rescoring the reversed items), so that higher SEHS and SEDAS scores indicated stronger individual beliefs that
society pressures people to be happy, and disapproves of negative emotion, respectively. Due to an irreversible
coding error the SEDAS scores for Poland are missing.

11
Vol.:(0123456789)

Scientifc Reports | (2022) 12:1514 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-04262-z
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

World happiness index. To get a robust indication of the country-level happiness reported within a particular
society, we evaluated countries’ WHI score. A country’s WHI score is based on the average life evaluation of a
nationally representative sample10, using the Cantril Ladder54. In this single-item survey, respondents are asked
to evaluate the quality of their current life on a 11-rung ladder that ranges from worst possible life (zero) to best

possible life (ten). As such, the WHI is more an indication of the average life satisfaction displayed by the inhab-
itants of a particular country, rather than their global subjective well-being10. Cantril Ladder evaluations and

traditional self-report measures for life satisfaction (e.g.,61) are known to correlate very high62.
Because data collection took place in 2019, we adopted the WHI scores for that year (freely accessible online:
https://worldhappiness.report/ed/2019/). Te countries that took part in our study representatively covered
the global ranking (M=6.11; SD=0.86), with the Netherlands being the highest ranked country in our sample
(7.49; position 5) and Uganda the lowest (4.19; position 136 out of 156). For the participating sites in England,
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, we imputed the WHI score of the United Kingdom. In all analyses, we
used countries’ actual WHI score, not their corresponding ranking.
Statistical analyses. All analyses in this article were conducted in R (version 4.0.072). To reproduce our
results and fgures, researchers can consult the data, code and materials at the Open Science Framework (https://
osf.io/3aut4/). All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations.
Multilevel analysis. To account for the hierarchical structure of the data, we performed our analyses in a
multilevel framework, using the lme4 R-package73. Specifcally, we ran various two-level models, with persons
(n=7,443) nested within countries (n=40). In all models, slopes and intercept were allowed to vary randomly
across countries to account for possible national diferences in the found efects. For an intuitive interpretation of
the model parameter estimates, we group-mean centered all person-level predictors. Country-level WHI scores

were grand-mean centered. In this way, we efectively separated within- and between-country efects74. All sta-
tistical tests were two-sided.

To evaluate how the perception of the societal emotion standard in a country diferently relates to subjective
well-being as a function of nation’s global happiness level, we ran a series of multilevel models with the various
well-being indicators as the outcome of interest (i.e., cognitive, emotional and clinical well-being markers). At
the person-level, we either entered participants’ perceived societal pressure to feel positive (SEHS) or not to
feel negative (SEDAS) as the focal predictor (separately). At the country-level, we introduced the national WHI
scores and evaluated the cross-level interactions with the global intercept and person-level predictor. A generic
overview of all model formulae can be found in SI 4.
We emphasize that our multilevel approach inevitably introduces an asymmetry in the specifed relation

between outcome and predictor75. Because the selection of an outcome and predictor is always somewhat arbi-
trary with cross-sectional data, we additionally ran all reversed models, together with a third statistical approach

in which all variables were within-country standardized (to remove the asymmetry in a multilevel context76).
Results can be found in SI 6 and illustrate that this arbitrary decision did not impact our conclusions.
Robustness analysis. With respect to the emotional well-being components, we acknowledge that every item

operationalization of a PA and NA composite score is somewhat arbitrary. Because there is little theoretical con-
sensus on how researchers should exactly construct these afective aggregates77, we performed a leave-one-out

multiverse analysis for our PA and NA constructs (e.g.,78). For each of the multilevel models that involved PA or
NA frequency or intensity as a predictor, we evaluated the robustness of each model parameter under diferent
PA and NA operationalizations. Because we evaluated four specifc emotion items for each afective construct,
this yielded 15 alternative PA and NA operationalizations, each based on a unique combination of emotion
items. We entered each unique afective aggregate as a predictor in the previously outlined models, and evaluated

the proportion of models for which the signifcance test of each estimate (with α=0.05) yielded identical conclu-
sions as the model in which the PA and NA composites were based on all emotion items (of which the results

are presented here). A higher robustness percentage (R%) indicates that the model parameter is less driven by
particular PA and NA operationalizations.