Abstract
Verbal praise is often used to improve prospective memory performance in daily life. According to the motivation cognitive model, the promotional efect of verbal praise on prospective memory may depend largely on redeploying attentional 
resources, so its promotional efect is likely to be infuenced by attention. Two groups of college students (n=128, n=117) 
participated in two experimental studies that examined this hypothesis. Experiment 1 manipulated attention load by changing the difculty of the ongoing tasks to focus on the efect of verbal praise on prospective memory under diferent attention 
load conditions. The results showed that verbal praise promoted prospective memory performance under both attentional 
load conditions (low, high), but verbal praise mainly promoted the prospective component when the attentional load was 
low, meanwhile, verbal praise mainly promoted the retrospective component when the attention load was high. Experiment 
2 altered the dependence of prospective memory tasks on attentional resources by manipulating the cue focality, further 
exploring the promotional efect of verbal praise on prospective memory with diferent types of cues under the low attention 
load condition. The results showed that verbal praise only promoted prospective memory when non-focal cues were used. 
The results of this study partially verifed the motivation cognitive model.
Introduction
In daily life, many things require planning in advance, and 
remember to perform in the right situation. This is a typical prospective memory task (Einstein & McDaniel, 1990), 
and an example is remembering to print documents when 
you pass the printing shop. From the perspective of composition structure, prospective memory contains two components: prospective component and retrospective component. 
Among them, the prospective component refers to remembering something to do in the appropriate situation, mainly 
pointing to the recognition of cues, and is most closely 
related to cue monitoring. By comparison, the retrospective component refers to the specifc content of prospective memory intention, which mainly points to intention 
extraction and is related to retrospective memory (Smith 
& Bayen, 2004). The preparatory attention processing and 
memory processing (PAM) theory suggests that the processing of prospective memory includes preparatory attention 
processing and memory processing. Among them, the prospective component in prospective memory is controlled 
by preparatory attention processing, while the retrospective 
component is controlled by memory processing (Smith & 
Bayen, 2006). Preparatory attention processing continuously 
occupies individuals’attention resources after the intention 
is formed, and even if the target does not appear, they also 
continue to invest attention resources for cue monitoring. 
Due to the existence of preparatory attention, PAM theory 
holds that the processing of prospective memory always 
involves attention consumption (Smith & Bayen, 2004, 
2006). The multiprocess theory suggests that in most cases, 
the processing of prospective memory does indeed require 
a signifcant amount of self-initiated attentional resources, 
but in a few cases (such as focal cues), the cues of prospective memory may be spontaneously extracted, and therefore 
the processing of prospective memory may not involve preparatory attentional processing (Einstein et al., 2005). The 
implementation of a prospective memory task requires the 
successful recognition of cues and the successful extraction of intention content, so insufcient processing in any 
component may lead to the failure of prospective memory. 
* Yongxin Li 
liyongxin@henu.edu.cn
Yunfei Guo 
gyfhenu@126.com
Jiaqun Gan 
932048493@qq.com
1 Faculty of Education, Henan University, Jinming Road, 
Longting District, Kaifeng, China
Psychological Research
To ensure the successful execution of prospective memory 
tasks, reward is a method that people often use and several 
studies have shown that material rewards can signifcantly 
improve the prospective memory performance of children 
(Sheppard et al., 2015) and adults (Jeong & Cranney, 2009). 
However, in everyday life, non-material rewards are also 
often used to improve prospective memory performance, for 
example, verbal praise.
Verbal praise is a common type of non-material reward 
that efectively improves cognitive performance (Droe et al., 
2013; Ross et al., 2020). To date, most studies have focused 
on the promotional efect of verbal praise from the perspective of motivation. Deci et al. (1999) believes that the 
main reason for the efectiveness of verbal praise lies in an 
individual’s self-perception. Whether the content of verbal 
praise afrms the process (e.g., you were very focused in 
doing things) or the result (e.g., you did a good job on the 
prospective memory task), the information generated afrms 
the individuals’ abilities, which increases their feelings of 
competence and self-esteem. To demonstrate their ability, 
individuals will make greater eforts to achieve target tasks. 
Albrecht et al. (2014) further found that the verbal praise 
group had higher activation in the anterior striatum and 
midbrain, indicating that verbal reward improved individuals’ subjective evaluation of the task itself. In addition, they 
found no signifcant decline in cognitive performance after 
the withdrawal of verbal praise, suggesting that the efects 
of verbal praise are long-lasting. The efect of verbal praise 
on prospective memory may be closely related to metacognition. Motivation can alter an individual’s evaluation of the 
importance of prospective memory tasks, leading them to 
develop more detailed plans and adopt more efective strategies (such as setting reminders in advance) during the encoding stage, and to engage in more active retelling and strategic monitoring during the retention and retrieval stages, all 
of which may improve prospective memory performance 
(Kuhlmann, 2019; Rummel & Meiser, 2013). In addition, 
verbal praise, as a non-material motivation with positive 
feedback, can also lead individuals to have better expectations of their own prospective memory performance, which 
can also encourage them to strengthen attentional monitoring of prospective memory tasks (Kuhlmann, 2019; Rummel 
& Meiser, 2013; Schnitzspahn et al., 2011).
The motivational cognitive model explains in detail how 
motivation improves prospective memory performance. 
The motivational cognitive model suggests that prospective 
memory goals associated with individuals are perceived as 
more important, and this importance may afect prospective memory tasks in two ways. First, when individuals 
perceive the importance of prospective memory tasks, they 
will assign more attention resources to prospective memory 
tasks, which is conducive to adequate processing of prospective memory tasks, thereby improving prospective memory 
performance, which is consistent with the views of PAM 
theory. Second, motivation may prompt individuals to adopt 
some strategies to further ensure the successful execution 
of prospective memory tasks (Penningroth & Scott, 2013a, 
2015). But the use of strategies typically requires individuals 
to plan ahead during the coding phase. Therefore, the adoption of efective strategies is also the result of individuals 
making eforts in advance. The performance of prospective 
memory tasks improved signifcantly when participants 
received higher importance ratings (Kliegel et al., 2004) and 
when more attention resources were assigned (Moyes et al., 
2019). In short, the core view of the motivational cognitive 
model is that individuals will make more eforts to process 
prospective memory tasks more fully under motivational 
conditions, so as to improve prospective memory performance. Since the strategies employed by individuals cannot 
be measured by objective methods, this study focused on 
the changes in individuals’ attention to determine whether 
they put in more efort under the condition of verbal praise.
The promotional efect of verbal praise on prospective 
memory is likely to be afected by attention load. Verbal 
praise can result in a person evaluating a task as being more 
important (Albrecht et al., 2014), while importance itself 
can prompt individuals to allocate more attention resources 
to ensure the completion of prospective memory tasks (Penningroth & Scott, 2013a). Prospective memory studies in 
the laboratory usually adopt a dual-task paradigm, in which 
prospective memory tasks are inserted into ongoing tasks 
and performed simultaneously (Bisiacchi et al., 2009). In 
the case of moderate task difculty, individuals can indeed 
allocate more attention resources to the prospective memory 
task when motivated to do so, while individuals’ attention to 
an ongoing task is poor when the task is very difcult. At the 
same time, individuals who received motivation also faced 
difculties in attention deployment under the high attention 
load condition, which hindered their ability to transfer attention resources from ongoing tasks to prospective memory 
tasks (Guo et al., 2023). Therefore, we speculated that verbal 
praise was likely to promote prospective memory only under 
the condition of low attentional load.
Even when attention resources are adequate, the efect 
of verbal praise on prospective memory may vary based on 
how much prospective memory depends on self-initiated 
attention resources. Varying cue focality can alter the attention demand in the prospective memory task itself. There 
is an overlap between the recognition of focal cues in prospective memory and the processing of ongoing tasks (for 
example, both the prospective memory cue and the ongoing 
task are color judgments), and the individual can identify the 
prospective memory cue while processing the ongoing tasks. 
Therefore, the processing of prospective memory does not 
consume additional attention resources (Scullin et al., 2007, 
2010). By comparison, the recognition of non-focal cues 
Psychological Research
does not overlap with the processing of ongoing tasks (for 
example, the ongoing task is color judgment, while the prospective memory tasks are word recognition), and individuals need to pay extra attention resources to the processing of 
prospective memory cues after processing the ongoing tasks. 
The prospective memory of focal cues is not highly dependent on cue monitoring and it is difcult to improve the performance of prospective memory even if given additional 
attention resources. By comparison, non-focal prospective 
memory tasks are highly dependent on cue monitoring, and 
improvement in performance is generally closely related to 
preparatory attention (Kliegel et al., 2008). Therefore, in the 
verbal praise condition, more attention costs do not promote 
prospective memory performance for focal cues, while performance should be better in the presence of non-focal cues.
Whether verbal praise mainly promotes prospective 
memory through the prospective component or retrospective component deserves further attention. The prospective 
component mainly involves cue recognition, while the retrospective component mainly involves intention extraction 
(Lajeunesse et al., 2019). Identifying which component 
of prospective memory is enhanced by verbal praise will 
help clarify the mechanism that underpins this efect. The 
motivational cognitive model also states that the motivational induction may be promoted in two ways: the frst is to 
encourage individuals to pay more attention to prospective 
memory tasks; the second is to promote the spontaneous 
extraction of a prospective memory intention through various methods (e.g., strategies) (Penningroth & Scott, 2013b; 
Penningroth et al., 2011). Of them, the attention allocated by 
the former is mainly used for cue retrieval, which is mainly 
related to the prospective component (Guo et al., 2023; 
Harrison & Einstein, 2010; Hering et al., 2013), while the 
extraction intention by the latter refects the retrospective 
component (Smith & Bayen, 2004). Therefore, if the prospective component and the retrospective component can 
be separated, the applicability of the motivational cognitive 
model in this study can be verifed. Previous studies have 
used mathematical calculation (Cohen et al., 2001) and task 
separation (Meier & Zimmermann, 2015) to separate prospective and retrospective components without considering 
individual guessing. Multinomial processing tree (MPT) 
model is more advantageous because it compensates for 
this shortcoming.
MPT model is a simple and efective modeling method 
formed by the integration of cognitive psychology and statistics and other related disciplines (Smith & Bayen, 2004). 
This model is based on the PAM theory. The MPT model 
holds that the prospective component corresponds to the preparatory attention processing, while the retrospective component corresponds to the memory processing. The model 
requires that the ongoing task must be a task with two alternative responses. For example, if the ongoing task is a color 
judgment task, the computer screen frst shows four colored 
boxes, followed by a colored word. Individuals are asked to 
judge whether the color of the word appeared in the previous four boxes. If the answer is ‘yes’, the individual should 
press the J key on the keyboard, otherwise he/she should 
press the F key. The prospective memory task involves the 
individual pressing the space key when encountering specifc words. There are four types of words in total: (1) a 
PM task with the same color; (2) a PM task with diferent 
color; (3) an ongoing task with the same color; and (4) an 
ongoing task with a diferent color. Each word appears with 
three responses: the J key, the F key, and the space bar (as 
shown in Fig. 1). Meanwhile, seven parameters need to be 
introduced to refect the relationship between the four types 
of words and the three responses: C1, C2, P, M1, M2, g, and c. 
C1 is the probability of identifying the same color. C2 is the 
probability of identifying a diferent color. P is preparatory 
attentional processing. M1 is the probability of identifying a 
prospective memory target. M2 is the probability of identifying the non-prospective memory target, g is the probability 
of guessing a prospective memory target and c is the probability of guessing the same color (Schnitzspahn et al., 2012; 
Smith & Bayen, 2004). In short, C1 and C2 refect the probability that individuals actually respond correctly to ongoing 
tasks, P refects the probability that individuals successfully 
monitor the prospective memory cue, and M1 and M2 refect 
the probability that individuals correctly recall the prospective memory intention content. However, it is possible for 
individuals to make correct prospective memory responses 
and ongoing tasks responses through guessing in some trials. To better explain the role of guessing, it is necessary 
to introduce the two parameters c and g. The MPT model 
contains seven free parameters, and the maximum likelihood 
estimation method is used to estimate the parameters. Since 
there are seven parameters to be estimated in the model, in 
order to make the parameters measurable, Erdfelder et al. 
(2009) pointed out that it is necessary to make assumptions 
about the relationship between each parameter to reduce the 
number of parameters. There are two ways to do this. The 
frst is to set two or more parameters equal (Bayen et al., 
1996), and the second is to assign specifc values to parameters (Erdfelder & Buchner, 1998). Smith and Bayen (2004) 
determined the values of c and g by changing c and g to 
observe whether P and M change. The results showed that 
when the value of g was between 0.07 and 0.17, and the 
value of c was between 0.07 and 0.85, the values of P and 
M remained stable. To make g and c close to the average 
values and considering the convenience of calculation, they 
made the following assignments: c=0.5, g=0.1. According to the standard assumptions of the multinomial models 
of source monitoring (Bayes et al., 1996), the probability 
of individuals identifying targets and identifying nontargets 
should be equal, and Smith and Bayen set M1= M2. These 
Psychological Research
Fig.
1 Multinomial process
-
ing tree model of event-based 
prospective memory (Smith & 
Bayen, 2004). PM represents 
prospective memory
Psychological Research
settings results in a new four-parameter model: C1, C2, P, 
M. The estimated values of these four parameters can be 
obtained by inputting the response category frequencies 
of all participants for each trial type in the multiTree software (Moshagen, 2010). The specifc response frequency 
required by the MPT model in the software can be referred 
to the Table 2 of this study. In this case, P represents the 
prospective component and M represents the retrospective 
component. Finally, by comparing the parameters, we can 
determine whether there are diferences in the prospective 
and retrospective components between the verbal praise 
group and the control group, to determine which component 
is responsible for generating the promotional efect of verbal 
praise on prospective memory. Currently, many studies have 
validated the efectiveness of MPT in separating prospective and retrospective components in prospective memory 
(Smith & Bayen, 2006; Smith et al., 2010, 2014). However, 
the MPT model is based on the PAM theory, and its premise is that individuals must adopt preparatory attention processing to monitor prospective memory cues. But under the 
condition of focal cues, the cue monitoring of prospective 
memory overlaps with ongoing task processing to a high 
extent, which cannot guarantee that the monitoring of focal 
cues necessarily requires preparatory attention processing 
(Einstein et al., 2005), Therefore, the MPT model is currently unable to separate the prospective and retrospective 
components of prospective memory with focal cues.
The present study is the frst to focus primarily on the 
efect of verbal praise on prospective memory from the 
attentional perspective. Experiment 1 explored the efect 
of verbal praise on prospective memory under diferent 
attentional loads by manipulating the difculty of the ongoing task and varying the attention resources available to an 
individual. We hypothesized that verbal praise promotes 
prospective memory only under the condition of low attentional load. Experiment 2 further manipulated the degree of 
dependence of the prospective memory task on cue monitoring by cue focality under the low attentional load condition, 
and further focused on the infuence of verbal praise on prospective memory under diferent cue types. We hypothesized 
that verbal praise promotes prospective memory only under 
the non-focal-cue condition. This study has theoretical as 
well as practical signifcance. From a theoretical perspective, this study examined the changes in diferent prospective 
memory components in the verbal praise group. The results 
of this study provide a preliminary explanation of the promotional efect of verbal praise on prospective memory and 
verify the applicability of the motivational cognitive model 
in explaining this efect. In terms of applicability, the results 
of this study confrm the boundary conditions under which 
verbal praise has a promotional efect and provides suggestions regarding how verbal praise can be used to improve 
prospective memory performance in daily life.
Experiment 1
Participants
A total of 128 college students aged 18–25 were recruited, of 
whom 43 (33.6%) were male. They were randomly assigned 
to four groups: 32 in the low-load task and control group, 
32 in the low-load task and experimental group, 32 in the 
high-load task and control group, and 32 in the high-load 
task and experimental group. All participants had normal 
vision, no red and green color blindness, were familiar with 
the basic operation of the computer, and had not participated 
in a similar experiment recently. All participants were tested 
independently, and they received 20 CNY (about 3 USD) as 
compensation after the experiment. All participants signed 
a written informed consent form. The studies were reviewed 
and approved by the Institutional Review Board of Henan 
Provincial Key Laboratory of Psychology and Behavior 
(NO: 20220715011).
Experimental design
We adopted a 2 (group: verbal praise group, control 
group)×2 (attention load: low-load, high-load) betweensubjects design.
Procedure
The experimental procedure involved two stages: the practice stage and the formal experimental stage. At the beginning of the experiment, the experimenter explained the 
experiment to participants, and then questioned them about 
the task requirements to make sure that they had understood the task correctly. The practice stage began with the 
appearance of a “+” (250 ms), on the center of the computer 
screen followed by four (low attentional load condition) or 
six (high attentional load condition) squares with diferent colors (800 ms), and fnally a colored word (4000 ms) 
appeared. Participants were asked to judge the color of the 
words. If the word color was the same as the color of any 
of the previous squares, they were to press the J key; otherwise, they were to press the F key. The prospective memory 
task involved the participant pressing the space bar when 
the word “name” or “atmosphere” was encountered. During 
the practice phase, two prospective memory cues appeared 
once each. After the practice stage, the formal experiment 
began. Participants in the verbal praise group were praised 
by the experimenter after they completed the practice stage, 
with the praise meeting three criteria. First, the praise was 
based on how well the participant performed in the practice 
phase. Second, the praise focused on the prospective task, 
telling the participant that he/she had done well on the prospective task and that he or she was at the top of the list of 
Psychological Research
participants. Finally, the participant was told to keep going. 
For example, “You did a good job on the prospective task. 
The correct rate is very high and you are at the top of the 
group.” The control group was told something irrelevant at 
the end of the practice stage. After the participants understood the instructions, they commenced the formal experiment. All the participants needed to have a 5-min delay 
before executing the formal experimental program, and the 
flling tasks during the delay period were some simple arithmetic questions. The formal experiment consisted of 120 
ongoing tasks, into which four prospective memory tasks 
were randomly inserted (Figs. 2, 3).
Results
Results of task responses
Prospective memory accuracy The results of an analysis 
of variance (ANOVA) showed a signifcant main efect of 
attentional load, F(1,124)=5.68, p<0.05, ηp
2=0.04, with 
accuracy being greater in the low-load than in the high-load 
condition. The main efect of group was also signifcant, 
with the verbal praise group being more accurate than the 
control group, F(1,124)=10.27, p<0.01, ηp
2=0.08. The 
interaction between group and attentional load, however, 
was not signifcant, p>0.05.
Prospective memory reaction time the results of an 
ANOVA showed no signifcant main efect of attentional 
load or group and no signifcant interaction between the two, 
ps>0.05.
Ongoing task accuracy The results of an ANOVA 
showed a signifcant main efect of attentional load, F(1, 
124)=103.71, p<0.001, ηp
2=0.45, with accuracy higher in 
the low-load than in the high-load condition. The main efect 
of group and the interaction between group and attentional 
load were not signifcant, ps>0.05.
Ongoing task response time The results of an ANOVA 
showed that the main efect of attentional load was not signifcant, p>0.05. However, the main efect of group was 
signifcant, F(1, 124)=5.55, p<0.05, ηp
2=0.04, with the 
verbal praise group responding more slowly than the control 
group. The interaction between attentional load and group 
was not signifcant, p>0.05 (Table 1).
The results of multinomial process tree (MPT) 
modeling
Model ft test: Model ft is the degree of ft between the 
observed data and the value estimated by the model, 
expressed by the statistic G2
 (similar to the Chi-square 
distribution), which is mainly used to explain whether the 
observed data is suitable for MPT modeling analysis. In 
this study, MultiTree v0.47 software was used to analyze 
all participants’ responses, as shown in Table 2. Data from 
the control and experimental groups in both the low attention load condition (G2
(4)=2.96, p>0.05, G2
(4)=1.00, 
p>0.05) and high attention load condition (G2
(4)=2.03, 
Fig. 2 Schematic diagram of the 
ongoing task under the low-load 
condition
Fig. 3 Schematic diagram of 
ongoing task under high the 
attention load condition
Psychological Research
p>0.05, G2
(4)=2.27, p>0.05) were tested for the ft degree 
of model, and the results showed that the ft degree was 
good.
Parameter estimation and analysis We focused on the differences in the prospective component (P) and retrospective 
component (M) between the control group and the verbal 
praise group under low and high attention load conditions, 
respectively. The results showed that the prospective component of the verbal praise group (p=0.69) was higher than the 
control group’s (p=0.56) when the attentional load was low, 
ΔG2
(1)=4.64, p<0.05. By comparison, the prospective 
component of the verbal praise group (p=0.54) did not differ from the control group’s (p=0.44) when the attentional 
load was high, ΔG2
(1)=1.81, p>0.05. In addition, there 
was no diference between the verbal praise group (M=0.96) 
and the control group (M =0.97) in the retrospective component when the attentional low was low, ΔG2
(1)=0.88, 
p>0.05. Finally, the retrospective component of the verbal 
praise group (M =0.97) was signifcantly higher than the 
control group (M=0.90) when the attentional load was high, 
ΔG2
(1)=6.74, p<0.01.
Discussion
Experiment 1 mainly manipulated individuals' available 
attention resources through the difculty of the ongoing 
task, to explore the infuence of verbal praise on prospective memory under diferent attention loads. We found that 
the prospective memory performance of the verbal praise 
group was better than the control group’s under both low 
and high attentional load conditions, indicating that the promotional efect of verbal praise on prospective memory was 
not limited by attention load, which was inconsistent with 
our prediction. The results also showed that the verbal praise 
group’s response speed on the ongoing task was slower than 
the control group’s, indicating that the verbal praise group 
assigned more attention resources to the prospective memory task. This confrms the ideas of previous studies (Deci 
et al., 1999) and the predictions of the motivation cognitive 
model (Penningroth & Scott, 2013a).
Although verbal praise facilitated prospective memory 
in both high and low attentional load conditions, verbal 
praise had varying efects on diferent prospective memory 
components under diferent attentional load conditions. 
When attention load was low, the verbal praise group was 
higher than the control group on the prospective component 
only, indicating that verbal praise can improve prospective 
memory performance by promoting the prospective component under the sufcient attention condition. However, 
when attention load was high, the verbal praise group was 
better than the control group on the retrospective component 
only, which indicates that verbal praise can promote prospective memory performance mainly through improving 
the retrospective component under the insufcient attention 
condition.
Experiment 1 mainly focused on non-focal prospective 
memory, which consumed additional attention resources 
for cue retrieval (Scullin et al., 2010). Verbal praise can be 
facilitated by allocating more attention resources to prospective memory tasks. We also found that verbal praise acted 
as a facilitator by allocating more attention resources to cue 
retrieval (the prospective component) under the adequate 
attention condition. However, the processing of focal cues 
Table 1 Participants’ prospective memory performance and ongoing 
task performance
Low-control control group under the low attention load condition; 
Low-praise praise group under the low attention load condition; 
High-control control group under the high attention load condition; 
High-praise praise group under the high attention load condition; 
ACC accuracy; RT response time
Prospective memory Ongoing task
ACC RT (ms) ACC RT (ms)
Low-control 0.49 (0.29) 1102 (357) 0.78 (0.08) 1144 (279)
Low-praise 0.60 (0.24) 1157 (272) 0.78 (0.07) 1212 (295)
High-control 0.34 (0.27) 1157 (321) 0.65 (0.05) 1127 (191)
High-praise 0.53 (0.26) 1260 (309) 0.67 (0.06) 1282 (292)
Table 2 Response category frequencies of all participants for each 
trial type
Low-control control group under the low attention load condition; 
Low-praise praise group under the low attention load condition; 
High-control control group under the high attention load condition; 
High-praise praise group under the high attention load condition; PM
prospective memory; OT ongoing task
Trial type Response type
“F” “J” “Space”
Low-control PM: Same 9 21 35
PM: Diferent 24 10 40
OT: Same 480 1477 3
OT: Diferent 1367 377 6
High-control PM: Same 6 15 48
PM: Diferent 17 7 45
OT: Same 434 1439 3
OT: Diferent 1393 462 4
Low-praise PM: Same 11 26 29
PM: Diferent 32 13 26
OT: Same 638 1191 8
OT: Diferent 1205 654 9
High-praise PM: Same 10 26 39
PM: Diferent 20 9 33
OT: Same 718 1133 3
OT: Diferent 1197 647 4
Psychological Research
does not require additional attention consumption and is less 
dependent on attention monitoring (Harrison & Einstein, 
2010). Even with sufcient attention (for example, under the 
low attention load condition), the verbal praise group can 
assign sufcient attention to the prospective memory task, 
but the prospective memory task itself is not highly dependent on attention monitoring, their prospective memory 
performance may be less likely to beneft from additional 
attention costs. Experiment 2 further examined whether the 
promotional efect of verbal praise on prospective memory 
was afected by cue focality under low attention loads.
Experiment 2
Participants
One hundred and seventeen college students, aged 
18–25 years old, including 53 males (45.3%), were randomly 
recruited. The participants were randomly assigned into four 
groups: 29 in the focal cue and control group, 30 in the focal 
cue and experimental group, 30 in the non-focal cue and 
control group, and 28 in the non-focal cue and experimental 
group. Other aspects were consistent with Experiment 1.
Experimental design
A between-subject experiment design of two (groups: verbal 
praise group, control group)×2 (cue focality: focal cue, nonfocal cue) was adopted.
Experimental procedure
The procedure in the non-focal cue condition was exactly 
the same as in Experiment 1. Under the focal-cue condition, 
the prospective memory task involved pressing the space bar 
when yellow-colored words were encountered, and the rest 
is consistent with Experiment 1.
Results
The MPT model is based on the PAM theory, which posits 
that the successful execution of prospective memory tasks 
always requires attention resources (Smith, 2003). Some 
studies have found no evidence that the processing of prospective memory tasks is monitored with focal cues (Brewer 
et al., 2010; Harrison & Einstein, 2010), hence, we did not 
analyze the diferent components of prospective memory in 
Experiment 2.
Prospective memory accuracy The results of an ANOVA 
showed that the main efect of cue focality was signifcant, F(1, 113)=7.32, p<0.01, ηp
2=0.06, with accuracy 
being greater with the focal cue than the non-focal cue. The 
main efect of group was also signifcant, F(1, 113)=4.90, 
p<0.05, ηp
2=0.04, with accuracy being higher in the verbal praise group than in the control group. The interaction 
between cue focality and group was also signifcant, F(1, 
113)=5.44, p<0.05, ηp
2=0.05, with accuracy being higher 
in the verbal praise group than in the control group under 
the non-focal cue condition, p<0.05, while there was no 
diference between the two groups in the focal cue condition, p>0.05.
Prospective memory response time The results of an 
ANOVA showed a signifcant main efect of cue focality,
F(1, 113)=9.88, p<0.01, ηp
2=0.07, with faster response 
speed in the focal cue than in the non-focal cue condition. 
However, the main effect of group was not significant, 
p>0.05 and the interaction between cue focality and group 
was also not signifcant, p>0.05.
Ongoing task accuracy The results of an ANOVA showed 
that neither the main efects of cue focality or group nor the 
interaction between the two were signifcant, ps>0.05.
Ongoing task response time The results of an ANOVA 
showed a significant main effect of cue focality, F(1, 
113)=6.21, p<0.05, ηp
2=0.05, with faster ongoing task 
response speed in the focal cue than in the non-focal cue 
condition. The main efect of group was also signifcant, 
F(1, 113)=4.31, p<0.05, ηp
2=0.04, with the verbal praise 
group responding more slowly than the control group. None 
of the interactions between group and cue focality were signifcant, ps>0.05 (Table 3).
Discussion
Experiment 1 revealed that verbal praise promoted prospective memory processing by allocating more attention under 
the high-load condition. Experiment 2 further focused on 
whether more attention resources allocated to prospective 
memory tasks by verbal praise would promote prospective 
Table 3 Participants’ performance on prospective memory tasks and 
ongoing tasks in focal and non-focal conditions
Focal-control control group under the focal cue condition; Focalpraise praise group under the focal cue condition; Non-focal-control
control group under the non-focal cue condition; Non-focal-praise
praise group under the non-focal cue condition; ACC accuracy; RT
response time
Prospective memory Ongoing task
ACC RT (ms) ACC RT (ms)
Focal-control 0.71 (0.27) 937 (201) 0.76 (0.07) 941 (195)
Focal-praise 0.70 (0.35) 954 (224) 0.80 (0.08) 1037 (246)
Non-focalcontrol
0.41 (0.36) 1040 (300) 0.77 (0.07) 1089 (288)
Non-focal-praise 0.68 (0.24) 1152 (395) 0.78 (0.06) 1183 (246)
Psychological Research
memory performance only when non-focal cues were used. 
The results showed that the response speed of the ongoing 
task was faster with a focal cue than with a non-focal cue, 
which indicated that the prospective memory task required 
less attention monitoring with a focal cue compared to a 
non-focal cue. The verbal praise group’s response speed 
was slower than the control group, indicating that the verbal praise group reserved more sustained attention to process prospective memory tasks. However, we found that the 
verbal praise group’s prospective memory performance was 
better than the control group in the non-focal cue condition, which is consistent with the fndings of Experiment 1. 
However, there was no diference in prospective memory 
performance between the two groups in the focal cue condition, suggesting that prospective memory under the focal cue 
condition did not beneft from verbal praise. This is inconsistent with the view of the motivation cognitive model (Penningroth & Scott, 2013a).
In summary, the results of Experiment 2 showed that 
the prospective memory task involving a focal cue was less 
dependent on attention monitoring. Individuals in the verbal 
praise group did not signifcantly improve focal-cue prospective memory performance even though they assigned 
more attention resources to the focal prospective memory 
task. The PAM theory suggests that prospective memory 
involves two processing processes: preparatory attention 
processing and memory processing. Due to the existence of 
preparatory attention processing, individuals will inevitably 
consume attention resources for cue monitoring (Smith & 
Bayen, 2004, 2006). However, the multiprocess theory suggests that the processing of prospective memory requires 
attentional costs in most cases. But in a few cases (such as 
under the focal-cue condition), prospective memory cues can 
be spontaneously extracted, and the dependence of prospective memory with focal cues on attentional monitoring is 
not strong (Einstein et al., 2005). Therefore, although verbal 
praise encourages individuals to allocate more attentional 
resources to prospective memory tasks, the extraction of 
focal cues does not heavily rely on cue monitoring, so verbal 
praise does not improve prospective memory performance 
for focal cues.
General discussion
Verbal praise has an efective efect on improving cognitive performance (Albrecht et al., 2014). As a typical social 
cognitive ability, prospective memory is very common in 
our life and greatly impacts our quality of life. Therefore, it 
is important to know whether verbal praise can promote prospective memory. However, to date no studies have directly 
examined this issue, and this study is the frst to explore the 
efect of verbal praise on prospective memory. Changes in 
the difculty of ongoing tasks can manipulate the attention 
resources that individuals allocate to prospective memory 
tasks (Guo et al., 2022), while highly difcult ongoing tasks 
limit the motivation to fexibly allocate attention resources to 
prospective memory tasks (Guo et al., 2023). Therefore, the 
promotional efect of verbal praise on prospective memory 
may be limited by attention load. Experiment 1 showed that 
verbal praise improved prospective memory performance 
under both low and high attention load conditions, which 
verifed our hypothesis under the low attention load condition only.
How does verbal praise improve prospective memory 
performance? MPT suggests that motivation may promote 
task importance in two ways: the frst is to encourage individuals to pay more attention to prospective memory tasks, 
and the second is to promote the spontaneous extraction 
of prospective memory intention contents through various 
pathways (Penningroth & Scott, 2013b; Penningroth et al., 
2011). Results of the present study showed that verbal praise 
improved prospective memory performance under both low 
and high attentional load conditions, and the results of the 
ongoing task showed that the verbal praise group assigned 
more attention to prospective memory tasks, confrming 
the frst pathway of MPT. However, we also found that verbal praise promoted the prospective component only when 
attentional load was low, indicating that individuals assigned 
more attention to cue retrieval of prospective memory under 
the sufcient attention condition, which is consistent with 
the MPT view. In the case of insufcient attention, although 
individuals also allocated more attention, it was not used 
to extract prospective memory cues, which meant that the 
prospective component did not beneft from more attention 
costs under the high attention load condition. At the same 
time, we found that verbal praise only improved the retrospective component performance under the high attention 
load condition. This suggests that verbal praise promotes 
the extraction of prospective memory intention in the case 
of insufcient attention and validates the second pathway of 
MPT. There are two possible reasons why verbal praise did 
not work through the prospective component but through the 
retrospective component in the high attention load condition. 
First, the ongoing task was more difcult. While the verbal 
praise group reserved more time for task processing (Heathcote et al., 2015), the highly difcult ongoing task hindered 
the transfer of attention (Zhang, 2017). Therefore, highdifculty ongoing tasks will hinder the transfer of attention 
from ongoing tasks to prospective memory tasks, which is 
not conducive to the retrieval of prospective memory cues. 
Second, high attentional load leads to a decline in retrospective memory, which makes prospective memory intentions 
difcult to extract (Marsh & Hicks, 1998). However, motivation encourages individuals to adopt more strategies to process the association between prospective memory cues and 
intention content in the coding stage, so that the intention 
Psychological Research
content is in a state of spontaneous extraction (Penningroth 
& Scott, 2013b). The higher the degree of automation of 
cognitive processing, the less afect attention load has on 
task performance (Zhang et al., 2011). Therefore, the retrospective component of the verbal praise group remained at a 
high automatic level of processing even under the condition 
of high attentional load, improving the performance of the 
retrospective component.
Although verbal praise can result in more attention being 
allocated to facilitate the search for non-focal cues when 
attention monitoring is adequate, prospective memory tasks 
for focal cues do not beneft from more attention. The results 
of this study showed that verbal praise continued to prompt 
individuals to reserve more attention resources for the processing of focal-cue prospective memory, but verbal praise 
did not improve the prospective memory performance of 
focal cues, which is inconsistent with the motivational cognitive model. This is mainly because the processing of focal 
cues is consistent with the processing of ongoing tasks, and 
individuals have fully retrieved and recognized prospective 
memory cues while processing ongoing tasks (Cona et al., 
2014). At the same time, the recognition of focal cues is 
mainly a bottom-up process (Zuber et al., 2019), while verbal praise mainly afects the top-down attention distribution 
process. Therefore, the prospective memory of focal cues is 
less likely to beneft from verbal praise.
Together, these results indicate that verbal praise can 
improve prospective memory performance under both low 
attentional load and high attentional load conditions. When 
attention load is low, verbal praise mainly improves prospective memory performance by allocating more attention 
to cue monitoring. When attention load is high, however, 
verbal praise improves prospective memory performance by 
promoting the extraction of the intended content. In addition, when attentional load was low, the attention resources 
reserved for prospective memory in the verbal praise group 
was benefcial for the prospective memory performance of 
non-focal cues, but not focal cues. The results of this study 
demonstrate that verbal praise does not promote prospective 
memory through both pathways of the motivational cognitive model, but through selective choosing one or the other.
This study has some limitations. First, this study only 
revealed the processing mechanism by which verbal praise 
promotes prospective memory using simple behavioral 
responses, which are relatively simple indicators. Eyetracking technology can refect the attentional changes more 
comprehensively and has more advantages in explaining 
the processing mechanism underpinning prospective memory. For example, pupil diameter can refect attention load 
(Moyes et al., 2019), and fxation time can refect processing degree (Wedel & Pieters, 2017). Multiple indicators of 
eye-tracking technology can identify what, when and how 
individuals attend to a stimulus. Second, the delay time of 
the prospective memory task in this study was relatively 
short. Under a long delay condition, individuals allocate less 
attention resources to prospective memory tasks (Conte & 
McBride, 2018) and forget more intended content (Barrouillet et al., 2012). Enhanced attention monitoring induced by 
verbal praise and the spontaneous extraction of the intended 
content should improve prospective memory performance 
to a greater extent. Third, this study adopted the betweensubjects design, which cannot exclude the infuence of individual diferences on the experimental efect (Greenwald, 
1976). Therefore, this study found that the promoting efect 
of verbal praise on prospective memory may also be mixed 
with the interference of individual diferences. This study 
systematically investigated the efects of verbal praise on 
prospective memory and its diferent components under different attentional load and cue focality conditions. Experiment 1 manipulated attention load by changing the difculty of the ongoing tasks to focus on the efect of verbal 
praise on prospective memory under diferent attention load 
conditions. The results showed that verbal praise promoted 
prospective memory performance under both attentional 
load conditions, but verbal praise mainly promoted the 
prospective component when the attentional load was low, 
meanwhile, verbal praise mainly promoted the retrospective component when the attentional load was high. Experiment 2 altered the dependence of prospective memory tasks 
on attention monitoring by manipulating the cue focality, 
further exploring the promotional efect of verbal praise on 
prospective memory with diferent types of cues under the 
low attention load condition. The results showed that verbal 
praise only promoted prospective memory when non-focal 
cues were used.
Author contributions YG, JG, and YL contributed to the study conception and design. Material preparation and data collection were 
performed by YG and JG. Data analysis was performed by YG and 
FG. The frst draft of the manuscript was written by YG, JG and YL 
commented on previous versions of the manuscript. All authors read 
and approved the fnal manuscript. The authors wish it to be known 
that, in their opinion, the frst two authors should be regarded as joint 
frst authors.
Funding This research did not receive any specifc grant from funding 
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proft sectors.
Data availability The data that support the fndings of this study are 
available from the corresponding author on request.
Declarations
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Conflict of interest The authors declare no confict of interest.
Ethical approval All procedures performed in studies involving human 
participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the insti-
Psychological Research
tutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki 
Declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.
Informed consent Informed consent was obtained from all individual 
participants included in the study